---
title: "Beige"
date: 2021-1-03T08:26:15Z
draft: false
weight: 60
---

# Beige

In the very beginning, our ancestors somehow someway had the first awakening. We stepped into a level of consciousness higher than other animals. A caveman dad is sitting on a rock with his child looking up at the full moon. The child says "Dad, what is that?" And both feel the awe and wonder of the world and their place in it. This is where it all started. We have been using fire and primitive tools for maybe a million years. We don't know when we started to use language and when we became aware of I, You, and Us. But awaken we did. We now had a higher vantage point of consciousness. Something different than other animals.

This is my favorite stage. It is a reminder that we at our core are animals. Thinking animals, yes, but always and forever animals. Here we revel in the delights of our bodies and feel at one with our world. This is what I strive to return to when I go backpacking. We are meant to be part of nature not separate from it. There is a powerful spirituality in simply fully letting in the beauty of the world. This is the level with the best sex -- primal and in the moment. This is where we go when we sit in front of a fire in the dark with friends and family and tell stories. This is the place we return to when we fully surrender to sweaty dance.

We find that when doing the deep work of healing trauma that it has to start here. In the body. [The body keeps the score](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Body_Keeps_the_Score). Animals like deers, instinctively know that when something traumatic happens, like getting chased by a mountain lion, they have to take a moment and shake it off. The body has a deep wisdom of its own. But what a miracle to find conscious mind inside our bodies. What a delicious thing it is to look out at the world and be a part of it yet separate.

There seems to be a longing in modern society to return to this level. This is the level people go to in a Zombie Apocalypse movie. A small band striving to survive in a hostile world where everyone is trying to kill them. This is the level survivalists and preppers are living in -- in the end you can't trust anyone else to keep you and yours alive.

And just like in a Zombie Apocalypse series this survivalism eventually starts to pall. It is not enough to simply survive. We need something more. We crave meaning and purpose. And we start to look to others and begin to see the outlines of a bigger vision.

# Purple

Something amazing happened about 30,000 to 40,000 years ago. We see it in the [cave paintings] (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lascaux#:~:text=Lascaux%20(French%3A%20Grotte%20de%20Lascaux,and%20ceilings%20of%20the%20cave.) of the time. When we stop and really look at this powerful art we can not help but be moved. These people were just like us. This was clearly the next step up in consciousness. From smallish bands we formed bigger tribes and we became bad-asses. Human population numbers started to grow and we spread out across pretty much all of the planet. Starting from this time the populations of bigger animals like Mastodons crashed. Presumably because we hunted them to death.

And spirit became the center of our lives. Spirit of place, animal, and ancestors. Deep magic lives in the sacred places. Animal spirits and our ancestors are here to guide us, if only we can get quiet enough and reverent to hear them. We fast and pray for days. Then head off alone into the wilderness to do our sacred initiation rite and face our internal demons. Then we return to the wild celebration of the tribe. You are back! We are so glad you are back! We are one. Tell us of your visions so that we may all learn from the spirits. You are home. You are loved. So deeply loved.

Purple throws the best parties. It is a big part of the draw of the hippies in the 60's. From all accounts Woodstock was very Purple. We tend to idolize this stage, but movies like [Dances With Wolves[(https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0099348/)] do catch an important historical point. Colonists "kidnapped" by Native Americans almost *never* wanted to return when given the opportunity. The Native Americans living mostly at Purple were living a much richer, more satisfying life.

This is the stage when art really took off. We started to awaken to a higher purpose than just the day to day cycle of survival. We turned to each other and found we share an even bigger mystery than individual consciousness -- shared consciousness. We are tribal animals. The cruelest punishment we can devise is to hold someone separate and solitary. We have a physical need to be connected. And as tribe we are strong. As a tribe life is very, very good.

And yet we know the story does not end here. Why on earth would we leave this stage? And yet we did. It started innocently enough -- we simply started to settle down into once place so we could grow and raise our food. This happened independently in different places. Why? Maybe the pressure of increased population nudged us towards agriculture. The land can only support so many hunter gatherers. To support even higher populations you need to create more food. So agriculture was born.

# Red

Archeological records show that the first agricultural communities continued the egalitarian traditions of hunter gatherers. Everyone was (mostly) equal still. But populations shot up at this point and things started to get much more complicated. We stratified into layers of society. And then a new thing arose.  We chose to become as Gods.

This is the stage of empire. This is the stage of Alexander the Great, Genghis Khan, and Columbus. Rome was a very Red empire. It is important to realize that this is all we knew at the time. Our modern morality was not yet formed -- it was natural and right that the strong governed the weak. Alexander is remembered as a "great" man, but by today's standards he would be considered a murdering lunatic. The Roman empire by today's standards was a hopelessly evil slave empire. Genghis Khan by all accounts was a self-actualized guy who achieved his biggest dreams. Too bad about all those millions his troops killed. But here is the most important point. Genghis and his tribe did not consider themselves evil. They were just doing better what other people (like the Crusaders for example) would have done if only they had the martial excellence. They considered themselves the good guys.

There is of course a real darkness here. Pharaohs mercilessly drove countless suffering slaves to build the towering pyramids. Brutal wars of conquest swept across the known world. Wealth and power went to the very top and if you were in the vast bottom your average life span went way down.  Much of the suffering of the world still comes from this stage of thinking. And yet. We would become as Gods! Without this stage we would not have gone from from looking up in wonder at the moon, to landing on it and driving around in a go-kart. Think of what we are most proud of as a species -- conquering disease, discovering the workings of the universe, learning to fly, exquisite, beautiful works of music, art, and architecture. All of these had to start with the crazy determination to go to that next level. We were not content to simply stay just as we were.

This is the stage of personal excellence. The dedication and courage of an Olympic athlete starts here. The desire to radically change the world is very Red. The warriors who fight to keep us safe have a hot Red core to them. We need this level just as much as any of the levels, even despite all the baggage it brings. (And sometimes Red can be very inspiring)[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q7vtWB4owdE]

But in different regions of the world at different times people woke up and said "Enough! We need something bigger than this! Life must be more than just the strong oppressing the weak". And  something did arise. Something very beautiful.

# Blue

There is a Truth that is eternal and greater than us. This is what we wake up to in the Blue level. We surrender to something bigger than us. And that surrender brings a profound, sweet purpose and meaning to life. Before this, Truth was localized. Whoever had the most power and authority determined what Truth was. Now Truth is recognized as eternal and one.

God is one path to this Truth, but not the only way. Buddha woke up under a Bodhi tree just as himself, not a god. He taught a practical path to enlightenment that anyone willing to do the work can follow.  Plato based his work on the very Blue notion that the world is just a shadowy reflection of the ideal. The Greeks had no shortage of eloquent smart thinkers, but when those thinkers only focused on selfish, individual ends they just ended up with sophistry. Nothing useful could be built on that. Plato and Aristotle gave the world a glimpse of what is possible when you base your ideas on the foundation of Truth. Science needs this level first before it can flourish.

And then there was Christ. Imagine his time. Rome was confidently in charge of its brutal slave empire. And the people suffered. Christianity has a lot to answer for, but consider what happened at the very, very beginning of this religion. Some how, some way this man inspired a revolution that spread throughout the Western world. Women and slaves were recognized as beloved of God. Might makes right was no longer the highest truth. The cross which was a torture device used to keep people in line instead became a defiant symbol of redemption. What an incredibly sneaky but powerful way to revolt against the empire! No armies were needed. Instead people were ready and willing to die for a belief. And the world was changed.

Mohammed is a similar story. Just like Christ he went into the wilderness to find himself and when he came back he had am amazing story to tell. And people flocked to him because they hungered for the Truth he was teaching. From many warring tribes people joined together to become a community of believers. And they were kind to each other. Now orphans and widows were fed and protected. And because it worked and answered the longing for a meaningful life, this new religion spread throughout Arab lands and beyond.

Consider Confucius. Genghis Khan managed only to conquer the Northern part of China. After his death it was left to his son, Ögedei, to continue. The south turned out to be too strong to be conquered by simple Red tactics alone. Instead, Ögedei was taught the very blue Confucian way. He ended up conquering the south by being more Chinese than the Chinese. People long for a just, moral society.

Japan had a terrible period of civil war (the Sengoku Jidai) starting in the mid 1400's. The country suffered through countless battles for control until 1615 when Tokugawa finally managed to conquer the country for good. He established a very Blue neo-confucianist regime that launched Japan into a very long period of peace and prosperity. He observed what was happening to the lands to the south as the western traders made their way up the Asian coast. He did something that sounds crazy but was kind of genius. He shut the country tightly down. No one got in (especially westerners) and no one got out. And it worked. Japan enjoyed over 250 years of peace and prosperity without outside interference. It worked and worked until suddenly one day it no longer did. One day American battleships (the "Black Ships") steamed into Tokyo harbor completely ignoring Japan's strenuous objections. And on that day Japan was forced with a choice. Change or die.

# Orange

We next come to a period of history called the [The Age of Englightenment](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Age_of_Enlightenment). This was a turn away from the church and God towards looking for the Truth within. From this stage emerged modern science, capitalism, and democracy. America's Declaration of Independence is a quintessential expression of Orange:

>"We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness"

Self-evident means that when you introspect on it, it becomes clear that it is true. Math proofs are meant to be self-evident. This was the age of Reason. Notice how this puts the source of Truth back in the individual. The purpose of life is now not focused on God but instead the pursuit of happiness. And we need our liberty (freedom) to go and do that. Both free market capitalism and democracy trust the wisdom of the crowd to get us to the best answers. This was a very radical idea at the time, and yet it has worked out surprisingly well. Markets do seem to be a much better mechanism than command economies and democracy is a much better governing system than all the alternatives.

So when those American Black ships steamed into Tokyo, Japan was faced with a stark choice. Stay Blue and inevitably become some western (Orange) country's helpless colony, or make the switch to Orange. Japan chose to make the switch. This is a remarkable period of time called the [Meiji era](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meiji_(era)). Japan is the only non-western country that I am aware of that avoided colonization. It was maybe a century behind technologically, but because of all those years of peace and prosperity it had a strong cohesive base to build on. Remember up till now almost no Japanese had ever left the country (or if they had, they were not allowed back under pain of death). So Japan sent out Samurai nobles to study what they could learn from the different western countries to find the best ideas and bring them home. Within twenty years Japan was making enormous strides towards becoming an economic powerhouse. Within forty years it became a constitutional democracy and became one of the "Great Powers". Then, just like the other Great Powers it started to set up its very own colonies.

Which is exactly the problem when people only focus on themselves -- it can cause a lot of suffering. Japan avoided becoming colonized but went on to become a colonizer itself. That seems to be where Orange ultimately takes us. The core irony of America is that the phrase "All men are equal" was written by a slave owner who was forcing his underage slaves to have sex with him. Yuck. Maybe just maybe, all those appeals to Reason weren't as fair and impartial as they claimed. And what about all those people who were not white and male? What about their freedom and pursuit of happiness?


# Green

The genius of Martin Luther King's [I have a dream speech](http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/americas/3170387.stm) is that it builds on the (Orange) words of the Declaration of Independence and brings us forward into a new stage, Green.

>"I have a dream that one day this nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of its creed - we hold these truths to be self-evident: that all men are created equal.
>
>I have a dream that one day on the red hills of Georgia the sons of former slaves and the sons of former slave-owners will be able to sit down together at a table of brotherhood.

>...

>And when this happens, when we allow freedom to ring, when we let it ring from every village and every hamlet, from every state and every city, we will be able to speed up that day when all of God's children, black men and white men, Jews and Gentiles, Protestants and Catholics, will be able to join hands and sing in the words of the old Negro spiritual: "Free at last! Free at last! thank God Almighty, we are free at last!"

Notice how he bring us back together to our shared humanity. Our deeper freedom arises from coming together not splitting apart. This realization was the start of so many important awakenings. The environmental awakening. We commit to cherish, honor, and protect our mother earth. The feminist awakening. Time to break free of our sexist stereotypes and limits. The peace awakening. No more mindless wars. The race awakening. We recognize how deeply racist our society is and we commit to healing this broken mindset. Later on -- this one took much longer -- we started to embrace the LGBTQ community and the full continuum of our sexuality.

At this stage we start to realize that the Rational mind is not the sum total of Truth. Just because the detached observer mode ([Positivism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Positivism)) worked out well for physics does not mean it is suited to understanding all of human experience. There is so much more inside of us than just the rational observer. And it in fact turns out that all those objective truths we think we are working with are greatly influenced by out culture. Truth can not be considered to be wholly separate from the culture it is found in. This stage reminds us to look out to see all the groups we are bound to.

I was born in to this stage. My parents were liberal, college educated, school teachers who encouraged their children to care for this world. And Green explains a lot of things, except for the things I most needed to learn -- how to get out of all this pain that I am in? What does it mean to lead a rich, meaningful life? What does it mean to be fully human? For those questions I needed to turn within.

# Yellow

At some point we need to turn back to ourselves to find the Truth of things. We have absorbed the lessons of Green, and yet we need more. Green by itself won't get us to the healing we need. Green by itself won't heal the world. People insist on going their own selfish ways no matter how patiently we explain to them how stupid and evil they are. Then we try a little louder and slower, like you might to someone who does not speak English well. You. are. stupid. And. Evil! Huh. Still not working. YOU. ARE. STUPID. AND. EVIL!! How can they not understand that?!? Why don't they understand how stupid and evil they are?!? Perhaps there is a deeper level to go here? Maybe just maybe there is something more workable than dividing the world up into good and evil? But to convince you of that I need for you to go very deeply into yourself. Kind of like an odyssey of the soul. It can be a bit scary and painful, but there is also wonder and joy here. It feels like Odysseus cutting his ropes and jumping off the ship to join the Sirens, curious to know if maybe there is another world that comes after dying in this one.

And after we come up for air we are awakening all over again. Just like at the very beginning when we were staring in awe at the moon (Beige level) and looked around at a world both separate and part of us, in this Yellow stage we awaken to that very same thing but this time at an even deeper level. Because this time we have the lived experience of so many previous generations. There are so many ways to be human. And we welcome all of ourselves. Not just the bright pretty parts but the scary dangerous parts as well. Not just the perfect (and yes we welcome our own perfection!) but also the broken and hurting parts as well. All of us. The mother, father, hunter, priestess, farmer, soldier, empress, merchant, mystic, scientist, entrepreneur, slaver, abolitionist, politician, suffragette, environmentalist, humanist, seeker, healer. All of me. All of you. All of us.

Up to now I could point to well known, big historical shifts. You can argue that I am vastly over simplifying history (because in fact I definitely am), but you can not really argue that there have not been powerful, historical shifts in human consciousness. This stage, though, is just getting started and therefore I don't have a lot of history to point at. There are more people waking up to this level than you would suspect and yet I don't think we have properly fully entered this stage. Who is at this level? Probably you. The simple fact that you have read this far means you are at least are willing to look beyond the limitations of Green. Welcome!

Each stage had something that pulled people into it. What is pulling people into Yellow? Medicine (psychedelics). Although there are many paths that can lead to a Yellow awakening, by far the most straight forward way to get there is to do Medicine work. But please do this work with an experienced guide. This topic is well covered by others so I don't want to spend a lot of time on it here. If you are new to the topic do yourself a favor and read [How to Change Your Mind] (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/How_to_Change_Your_Mind#:~:text=8%20.P65%202018-,How%20to%20Change%20Your%20Mind%3A%20What%20the%20New%20Science%20of,New%20York%20Times%20best%2Dseller.). Michael Pollan (without knowing about Spiral Dynamics) does a superb job of explaining to people at the Green level what it is like to explore Yellow. People who are still at Orange are not ready to go to Yellow because their god of Reason is a jealous god that will not accept any other sources of truth. But at Green people start to get a glimmer that there are other paths to Truth and maybe just maybe Medicine is something worth investigating.

## Second Tier

Something different happens at this level than all the other levels. Spiral Dynamics calls this Yellow level the start of a whole new tier; the second tier. Unlike the other levels, second tier levels recognize that all the levels have their place within us. Each level has its own time and place. Categorizing people as stupid and evil is just not that useful. Genghis Khan did not consider himself evil. What he did made perfect sense to him. If we want to shift him we are going to have to speak to him in his own language. Simply telling him that he is stupid and evil just won't get us very far. But if we tell him that he needs to at least pretend to be Blue if he wants to finish his conquest of China he will listen. And in fact his son did listen to advice exactly like that and it brought about a much more enlightened form of government for a time. Second tier levels don't try to make the other levels wrong.

Second tier also repeats the lower levels but at a higher level. In music you can have the same note but at different octaves (up by 8). In a similar manner in Spiral Dynamics, Yellow is not an octave (8) but a hectave (up by 6) above Beige (first awakening). Two notes at different octaves are different but they also sort of sound the same. In a very similar manner even though Yellow is higher than Beige they share the same basic characteristics. I don't know how the creators of Spiral Dynamics came up with that notion, but I love that they did. It feels very true to me. Yellow is a second awakening. Yellow is the start of something new and very big.

Ken Wilber calls this level the Integral level. He points out that we no longer live in a separated world. The wisdom of all the traditions is available, and we should recognize that they all have a valuable 
We want more people to awaken to this level. So how do we do that? We need people to get enough out of their pain to discover how vast they are. We need people to learn a number of techniques and practices to help them find themselves. We teach kids how to do math, but we don't teach them even basic mental hygiene. There are so many techniques and practices we can learn to enrich our lives. First we need to get people enough out of their basic pain and trauma so that they are no longer actively causing damage to themselves and others. Then we need to teach them the many ways to flourish. Once you someone is on the growth path the rest will come naturally. The good news is that there are already many groups doing this work, we just need to link arms and make a more comprehensive healing framework. I will come back to this in the second part of the plan.

Clare Graves when he was formulating this theory noticed early on that through the developmental stages there was a kind of spiral back and forth between individual concerns and groups concerns. A fancy word for this is dialectic. There is an ongoing tic-tock between focus on the individual (tick) and then switching to focus on the group (tock). Beige level was all about waking up as an individual - tick. Purple was gathering together as Tribe -- tock. Red was individuals reaching towards Godhood -- tick. Blue brought us back to a community honoring Truth -- tock. Orange let the individual free -- tick. Green brought us back to protecting us all -- tock. Yellow steps deeply into individual discovery (tick). But it doesn't end here. The next level brings us back together once more -- tock.

# Turqoise

We have not been in Yellow that long and yet I find myself already longing for the next level, Turqoise. After finding our vast strength in Yellow we start to really open up to all that is. And it hurts. Really hurts. The world is suffering in so many needless ways and my deepest desire is to help the world out of that suffering. As someone who is stepping into the Grandfather stage of his life, I am committed to leaving a safer world for all the grandchildren. I can't do it alone. I will need the help of many, many others. My wild hope is that after people have found their individual strength in Yellow they will find they are up for the challenge of healing this world. And then they will look up and out to others and realize that we need a really big tribe to make this happen.

We don't really know yet exactly what Turquoise is going to look like. But we do have the pattern of what has happened up to now to give us some important clues. We know that this level will be the (tock) return to community concerns. And just like Yellow is a hectave above Beige and revisits that level, Turquoise is a hectave above Purple. We will know Turquoise is really emerging when people start to hold awesome, amazing parties. Burning Man might be an early example of that. Just like Purple was the start of religion, Turquoise almost certainly will see the rebirth of a new enlightened form of religion. It will be a practice of spirit that deeply nourishes and strengthens us. And we will become bad-asses once more.

I find it incredibly hopeful that this level is awakening exactly at the critical point where humanity chooses to either flourish or collapse with billions dying. We have a choice. We already have enough food to feed the world, but we choose not to. We already have enough medicine to heal all the world's sick, but we choose not to. We already have the technology to completely stop C02 emissions, but we choose not to. Our root problem is the consciousness we bring to this world.

Turquoise is like a prophecy in a story. It is a dream of what we hope and pray will come. And it can be our intention. Our guide of what needs to happen in order for the world to flourish. We need all the levels to make this dream work. We start back with Beige and welcome our primal connections with nature. We connect again deeply with our bodies, heal and embrace our sexuality, and find the first awakening within. Then in Purple we look to our tribe and spirit starts to fully awaken in us. Next in Red we find our warrior spirit. This dreams needs justice warriors who will protect it. After that in Blue we surrender to a Truth that is bigger than us. This is the ground we stand on. Orange lets us see the patterns of the world and reminds us that we are at choice even within that greater Truth. Green has us look to the suffering of others and the planet. We choose to care. It reminds us that Reason alone does not bring us to the full Truth. Yellow brings us to the sacred ground of ourselves. We do the deeper healing here and find our joy and strength. And then finally, finally in Turquoise we look out to others who are also just now starting to look up and out. We are all leaders and we are all followers here. We share a goal. For the children we dare not hold back any part of ourselves. This is much bigger than ourselves. And we commit. All of me, All of you, All of us. Together we are one sacred whole. So it is. So it shall be.
