---
title: "Yellow"
date: 2021-1-03T08:26:15Z
draft: false
weight: 70
---
<table style="width:100%">
  <tr>
    <th>Color</th>
    <th>Nickname</th>
    <th>Social construct</th>
    <th>Cause worth dying for</th>
  </tr>
  <tr id="Yellow">
    <td>Yellow</td>
    <td>SecondAwakening</td>
    <td>Integral Theory, personal growth movement, medicine movement</td>
    <td>A life worth living</td>
  </tr>
</table>

At some point we need to turn back to ourselves to find the Truth of things. We have absorbed the lessons of Green, and yet we need more. Green by itself won't get us to the healing we need. Green by itself won't heal the world. People insist on going their own selfish ways no matter how patiently we explain to them how stupid and evil they are. Then we try a little louder and slower, like you might to someone who does not speak English well. You. are. stupid. And. Evil! Huh. Still not working. YOU. ARE. STUPID. AND. EVIL!! How can they not understand that?!? Why don't they understand how stupid and evil they are?!? Maybe we are missing something? Perhaps there is a deeper level to go here? Maybe just maybe there is something more workable than dividing the world up into good and evil? But to convince you of that I need for you to go very deeply into yourself. Kind of like an odyssey of the soul. It can be a bit scary and painful, but there is also wonder and joy here. It feels like Odysseus cutting his ropes and jumping off the ship to join the Sirens, curious to know if maybe there is another world that comes after dying in this one.

And after we come up for air we are awakening all over again. Just like at the very beginning when we were staring in awe at the moon (Beige level) and looking around at a world both separate and part of us, in this Yellow stage we awaken to that very same thing but this time at an even deeper level. Because this time we have the lived experience of so many previous generations. There are so many ways to be human. And we welcome all of ourselves. Not just the bright pretty parts but the scary dangerous parts as well. Not just the perfect (and yes we welcome our own perfection!) but also the broken and hurting parts as well. All of us. The mother, father, shaman, empress, scientist, suffragette, seeker, healer. All of me. All of you. All of us.

Up to now I could point to well known, big historical shifts. You can argue that I am vastly over simplifying history (because in fact I definitely am), but you can not really argue that there have not been powerful, historical shifts in human consciousness. This stage, though, is just getting started and therefore I don't have a lot of history to point at. There are more people waking up to this level than you would suspect and yet I don't think we have properly fully entered this stage. Who is at this level? Probably you. The simple fact that you have read this far means you are at least are willing to look beyond the limitations of Green. Welcome!

Each stage had something that pulled people into it. What is pulling people into Yellow? The biggest pull right now is from Medicine (psychedelics) work. Although there are many paths that can lead to a Yellow awakening, by far the most straight forward way to get there is to do Medicine work. But please do this work with an experienced guide. This topic is well covered by others so I don't want to spend a lot of time on it here. If you are new to the topic do yourself a favor and read [How to Change Your Mind] (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/How_to_Change_Your_Mind#:~:text=8%20.P65%202018-,How%20to%20Change%20Your%20Mind%3A%20What%20the%20New%20Science%20of,New%20York%20Times%20best%2Dseller.). Michael Pollan (without knowing about Spiral Dynamics) does a superb job of explaining to people at the Green level what it is like to explore Yellow. People who are still at Orange are not ready to go straight to Yellow because their god of Reason is a jealous god that will not accept any other sources of truth. But at Green people start to get a glimmer that there are other paths to Truth and maybe just maybe Medicine is something worth investigating as a path of growth not just healing.

## Second Tier

Something different happens at this level than all the other levels. Spiral Dynamics calls this Yellow level the start of a whole new tier; the second tier. Unlike the first tier levels, second tier levels recognize that all the levels have their place within us. Each level has its own time and place. Categorizing people as stupid and evil is just not that useful. Genghis Khan did not consider himself evil. What he did made perfect sense to him. If we want to shift him we are going to have to speak to him in his own language. Simply telling him that he is stupid and evil just won't get us very far. But if we tell him that he needs to at least pretend to be Blue if he wants to finish his conquest of China he will listen. And in fact his son did listen to advice exactly like that and it brought about a much more enlightened form of government for a time. Second tier levels don't try to make the other levels wrong.

With Yellow we spiral back to the Beige level but at a higher level. Both levels have sort of the same "feel" to them though. In music you can have the same note but at different octaves (up by 8). Two notes at different octaves are different but they also sound the same. Spiral Dynamics levels seem to work the same way. Second tier levels are not an octave (8) up but a hectave (6) from their corresponding first tier level. I don't know how the creators of Spiral Dynamics came up with this idea, but I love that they did. It feels very true to me. Yellow is a second awakening. Yellow is the start of something new and very big. Just like Beige was a huge awakening of possibility so is Yellow.

Ken Wilber calls this second tier the Integral level. He points out that we no longer live in a separated world. The wisdom of all the traditions is available, and we should recognize that they all have a valuable lesson for us. Those of us who have achieved this tier have a special responsibility to the world. We see a little clearer and further than others. Whereas first tier levels tend to reject other levels as stupid and evil, at this tier we instead acknowledge that they all have their own inherent logic and use, but also that each of the first tier levels has dangerous blindspots that have to be managed and navigated. It is an act of moral cowardice to not accept this responsibility to guide. Global warming is real, and if not addressed could end up triggering a chain of events where billions die. Democracies quite often are overthrown by authoritarians and then there is great suffering. Some courses of action are better than others. I personally choose the path where it is less likely billions will die or suffer.

Then there is what I call the tick-tock part of Spiral Dynamics. Clare Graves when he was formulating this theory noticed early on that through the developmental stages there was a kind of spiral back and forth between individual concerns and groups concerns. A fancy word for this is dialectic. There is an ongoing tic-tock between focus on the individual (tick) and then switching to focus on the group (tock). Beige level was all about waking up as an individual - tick. Purple was gathering together as Tribe -- tock. Red was individuals reaching towards Godhood -- tick. Blue brought us back to a community honoring Truth -- tock. Orange let the individual free -- tick. Green brought us back to protecting us all -- tock. Yellow, start of the second tier steps deeply into individual discovery all over again (tick). But it doesn't end here. The next level brings us back together once more -- tock.
