---
title: "Truth"
date: 2022-22-01T05:26:15Z
draft: false
weight: 30
---
In first grade I had my first spiritual experience. I was walking down a long corridor thinking about how I want to keep on doing good things while simultaneously feeling kind of embarrassed and hokey and suddenly the light coming in from the windows got very strong and I was walking into this welcoming, warm light wrapping all around me. Yes. This. I will always step into the light. Always. This is my most precious gift. I will always step towards the light of Truth even if it requires walking over broken glass. I don't know how to teach this to others -- it was kind of just given to me.  

If we want to heal we have to find our deeper truths. Hakomi gently guides clients deeper and deeper into a non ordinary state of consciousness that helps them get all the way down to their core beliefs. These are the (mostly) unconscious beliefs people have about how the world works. What is and is not safe. These beliefs are usually created by a child desperately trying to survive against unfair odds. So we honor the genius of that child for finding something that worked, but then help them see how that solution also came with a price. A price that now maybe is not worth it. As adults they now have more resources and there are better solutions available. But first maybe they just need to spend some time soothing that hurt child and reassuring them that they are safe now.

HAI workshops revolve around group shares. People stand up in front of the group (usually stark naked) and are lovingly encouraged to share from the most vulnerable, authentic place they can find within themselves. Quite often people are inspired to stand up after having a breakthrough during one of the exercises. Or maybe they are moved to share their most painful secret. There is something incredibly beautiful about sharing your deepest, naked Truth in front of a circle of sacred witnesses. A circle that holds all of you in love. This group support helped me to get to my deeper places. Helped me get clearer about what was really going on for me. When I stood up sometimes it was like something was speaking through me. Afterwards I would sit down and run through what I just said because it was what I most needed to hear.

Getting to the truth of the matter can be hard and scary. We tend to resist. We conspire within ourselves to not know. And there are good reasons! This work if done incorrectly is not safe. Unless we can be compassionate and non-violent with all that we discover it actually might be a good idea to not let ourselves consciously know. But that conspiracy blocks the healing that needs to happen. What to do? Medicine Guides start with MDMA because it calms the hyper vigilant amygdala that is guarding us. We need to allow traumatic memories to surface. The ones that have been too hard to deal with up to now. Trauma memories are different than normal memories in that they get "stuck". People relive their war incident or car accident as if it had happened just a moment ago. Now they get the opportunity to work through these memories with their therapist and convert them to more normal memories. Trauma never goes away, but you can shift and transform it to a healthier place. And even if you don't have full on trauma, almost all of us have places of such deep shame or anguish that we can't stand to go there.

Besides calming the amygdala MDMA also turns up oxytocin, the love hormone, to open our hearts wide enough to be fully compassionate with ourselves. It lets us view our past mistakes with more forgiveness they we maybe normally muster. And it lets us form an unusually trusting bond with our guide. We need that to help us to next venture up into the higher mystery. Plant medicine trips are all about getting to the deeper Truth of the matter. Sometimes we need to really open ourselves to the universe in a really vulnerable way before we can get to the heart of it. Find out what is really going on with us. And when we finally get there we can no longer stay in that old story that was not serving. No longer can pretend we are asleep and not aware. Plant medicine is especially good for that. The trick is to find a way to make it safe. We can really hurt ourselves if we are not careful.

Think of people you know in your life who are struggling. Almost always they are not letting themselves know something important. Maybe they are verging on alcoholism or other addictive behaviors. Maybe they are so consumed with fear that they don't see how they are only focused on themselves and oblivious to the harm they are causing to others. It is so obvious to us as observers, but they are not letting themselves know it. We can try to compassionately help them find their Truth but this is something ultimately they have to find within themself.  We can't do it for them.

Now turn to yourself. You can see it in others, but what about you? What truths are you hiding from yourself? There must be some. There always is. And again, there is a very good reason we conspire with ourself to not know the full truth -- it would hurt too much. But as we practice non-violence we start to feel safer with more and more of our truth. And we start to get curious -- how deep and vast are we? We start to develop a habit of tracking ourselves. Catching those brief instants where we see the tail of Coyote whipping around that corner. Letting us know that, huh, there is something more going on here. Coyote is the trickster that shows up whenever we get too sure we fully know our Truth. We don't really but we think we do and Coyote just laughs and laughs at us. To find out more we need to get patient and simply watch ourselves. Yes, Coyote go ahead and laugh, you are right of course I must be missing something. I will get quiet and still to see what it is. I call this mindfulness. Let's turn to that next.
