---
title: "Mindfulness"
date: 2022-12-16T05:26:15Z
draft: false
weight: 40
---
A woman I was exploring dating with asked me what my accomplishments were. I struggled to come up with an answer. I love computer programming and have done some good work on some fun projects, but I don’t really hold on to any part of my career as an “accomplishment”. The woman abruptly cut off contact after that — she needed someone who has accomplished something in life. That stung but it was fine, I already had recognized that she had way too much ego attachment for a relationship to work. But it was an interesting question so I kept on thinking about it, and eventually I came up with something.  I have worked hard my whole life to get to the truth of the matter. And that really does feel like an accomplishment. Now that I am in the “charting the course for others” phase of my life I look around and see that others seem to struggle with this. There are a couple of reasons for that, but maybe the biggest is that finding our truth requires us to recognize how much we are constantly lying to ourselves. All. the. time. And how do we work with this? Mindfulness. 

There is a real discomfort to this. When we lie to ourselves we would much prefer that we don’t notice the lie. That is the whole point after all.  Let me give an example.  When I wrote about my mom asking me to get serious makeup work done before the wedding pictures, I realized that I never confronted her about that. I quickly told myself that I was protecting her feelings. But then I caught the tell-tale whiff of lying to myself yet again. Yes, protecting my mom was part of it, but even bigger than that I was protecting myself. So I was lying to myself in my favorite way — partial disclosure. And even the fact that I never even considered asking her was part of an internal conspiracy to stave off the pain. That whole thing was incredibly painful, why on earth would I want to wallow in it? No, I don’t need to wallow in my suffering, but I do want to step into all that I am. I don’t want to hide from myself parts that are inconvenient or hard to accept.

To get to where we need to go I’m asking you to step into the more difficult truths. Again, if this all gets too much, please, please take care of yourself. We usually lie to ourselves for a very good reason. And that is OK. Truly. And yet, as much as you safely can, please recognize that we all are holding back from any number of truths. This work takes patience and gentleness. The more we try to force it the harder we fight. The trick is to just stay curious and mindful. Huh. What was that right now? Notice how I quickly swept that thought away? Hmm. What is going on here? I sense there is something more here. Do you see how this works? The very first thing is to not beat yourself up around the lying. I had very good reasons to lie to myself —  a part of me was trying to protect me from a lot of pain. And going into this deeper truth can be very hard and painful. So why on earth would you do this work? It is a path to joy.

Sometimes there is a gift in even the hardest thing.  Let me give you an example. There was a time in my life when I was so sick that I could barely function. I had just gotten laid off and needed to find another job, but I was suddenly so sick all the time that I couldn’t get it together to even interview. It turns out that I had mercury poisoning probably from a botched filling removal (old school dental amalgams are 50% mercury!), but I didn’t know that at the time. All I knew was that my immune system was so compromised that I kept on getting sick over and over. I would get well for a few days and then bam! I was sick all over again. It was a scary time. I had barely enough savings to not work for two years, and I used all of that up and then went into debt. And I had so little energy and it kept on getting less and less. It was like living on a very small island where the water keeps on rising. Every day I was forced with a choice: stay in my current mental habits and drown or change my habits and step onto land.  Despite myself I was forced to a healthier mindset. Anything that required too much mental energy just had to go. And judgment and future tripping require a surprising amount of energy so I simply stopped doing them — I just didn’t have the energy to spare for it. 

We figured out the mercury thing and I started doing the really hard, grinding process of chelation to remove it.  Chelation uses a simple chemical to stir up all the mercury sequestered in the body and bring it into the blood system so it can be removed. It basically requires going through mercury poisoning over and over again.  But it worked, and on one beautiful day I realized I had a lot of extra energy.  So what did I do with this energy? I splurged on lots of judgments of others and future tripping! It felt like way overdosing on desserts, and no longer was as satisfying as it used to be. Something had shifted in me, and I could feel the difference. I was now very aware of the impact of judging others has on me — it is really draining.

This was a huge gift. And there was more; because I could stop judging others I also stopped judging myself so harshly. I accepted that I was scared and felt small. I finally, finally accepted that I was truly not perfect. Not even close. I was very deeply humbled. I felt affinity with the homeless people who also had also been crushed by life. I no longer judged myself superior. These were all such profound gifts. As I started to come back to health I went into a lot of joy. Part of that was simply no longer taking for granted my health. Every day of health was a precious gift. But part of it was that I managed to keep some of that humility and let go pretensions of my superiority. Let go of the illusion that I didn’t have any monsters lurking around inside me. Because I absolutely do. We all do.

One of my monsters is that I love to dominate. I secretly love to force my way on people. It showed up in football, and when I let it, it shows up when I have sex. Initially I was so horrified about this that I carefully kept even a hint of this from myself. But it is there alright. In BDSM there is something called “consensual non-consent”. It means that two parties agree to one forcing themselves upon the other. It is important to note that both parties want this and there are some safety precautions like setting up a “safe” word. But the reality is that we are setting up a rape scene. And I am the rapist. It doesn’t get much darker than that. And yet it lights up both of us. There is something electric about this power dynamic. Our bodies are guiding the way. Let’s go back to our bodies again.