---
title: "Truth"
date: 2022-12-16T05:26:15Z
draft: false
weight: 30
---
Let’s go back to accountability. I touched upon it in Beige, and Purple but it is here in Red where it gets real. Let’s approach accountability this time with a warrior’s mindset. When a warrior wants to get something done, they don’t get bogged down in all the excuses of why its other peoples fault. A warrior knows how to step into their power.

But most of us, most of the time are not in our power. Instead we are giving it away to someone else. Personally, I realized that it was not a question of **if** I was giving my power away but to **who** in that moment. I was always giving away my power — my boss, my partner, my family —  I was always giving it away. This is the Victim mindset. And what the Victim likes to do best is to recruit Rescuers to rally against the Perpetrator. 

The victim mindset is very seductive. Very. Why? Because it gets us off the hook. If we are the helpless victim then we don’t have to do the hard, scary work of really looking at ourself. We don’t have to change — other people do. Let me give you a recent personal example. My relationship with my partner deteriorated  to the point where we both are wondering if it makes sense to stay in relationship. To make it worse this all blew up while she is hiking the El Camino in Spain so we were really limited in how we could communicate. I’m pretty sure I could recruit you to be my Rescuer — god knows I’ve been trying to do that with other people. But that leaves me the helpless victim. Each night I startled awake at 3am in a panic, and started to think in outrage and pain on how she needs to have a conversation with me, this instant!

There are a couple of big problems with that mindset. For starters she is thousands of miles away and if she doesn’t care to communicate there is not a whole lot I can do about it. Another big problem is that I’m making her responsible for my happiness. I can only be happy if she does some specific thing. Since when is she responsible for my happiness?  I seem to have forgotten that I, and I alone am responsible for my own happiness.  The even bigger problem is me not taking responsibility for letting our relationship get to the point that we are in this crisis. This is not all on her, I played an equal role in all of that. And when I stepped back into accountability and stopped making it all about her, I’ve had some amazing potentially life changing realizations. I won’t go into all of it here, but amongst other things I realized how I kind of collapse into a relationship without keeping my own boundaries distinct. And I started to see the many, many ways I had given up my power.

It was a little painful to admit all of that to myself, but the advantage is now I’m in a position to do something about it. When I step into an accountability mindset I don’t just have to fear that every relationship that I have will collapse at some point, because now I see how I helped contributed to that, and now I can chose another path. It is a very powerful, warrior way to look at the world. Everything that happens I question how did I attract that? And what different choices might I make next time.

OK, that is my own personal story, but let’s step back into the bigger picture. What is it that we want for this world? More people in accountability. More people out of Victim. More people stepping into power.  But the thing about stepping into your power? When you become more powerful, your bullshit becomes more powerful too. For most of my life I’ve shied away from stepping into my power because I did not want to become one of those “powerful” white men that hurt people. No thank you, I will at the very least not actively make the world worse.

This is a real fear. I once took a leadership course and my small group leader, who was ironically a woman, modeled all the hard ass, dominant, stereotypical traits of what a “leader” looked like. And she caused real damage to our small group. We fell apart, and I dropped out of the class. If leadership is the strong person shouting the loudest, I want nothing to do with it. But it doesn’t have to be. What that woman was modeling was not leadership, but dominance. That is a very different thing, but people get really confused on this.

We want people stepping into their power yes maybe at times even in a Red dominant way, but we want that power harnessed and serving the greater good. It is so easy to slip into victim. I catch myself at it all the time. And it is also so easy to slip into only really paying attention to myself and not my impact on others. I also do that all the time. So how do we work with that? Mindfulness. Time to spiral back to that.

I have worked hard my whole life to get to the truth of things. It feels like my greatest accomplishment. Now that I am in the “charting the course for others” phase of my life I’m finally looking up from myself and when I look around it appears that others seem to struggle with this whole getting to the truth thing. There are a couple of reasons for that, but maybe the biggest is that finding our truth requires us to recognize how much we are constantly lying to ourselves. All. the. time.  Let me give an example.  When I wrote about my mom asking me to get serious makeup work done before the wedding pictures, I realized that I never confronted her about that. I quickly told myself that I was protecting her feelings. But then I caught the tell-tale whiff of lying to myself yet again. Yes, protecting my mom was part of it, but even bigger than that I was protecting myself. So I was lying to myself in my favorite way — partial disclosure. And even the fact that I never even considered asking her was part of an internal conspiracy to stave off the pain. That whole thing was incredibly painful, why on earth would I want to wallow in it? No, I don’t need to wallow in my suffering, but I do want to step into all that I am. I don’t want to hide from myself parts that are inconvenient or hard to accept.



