---
title: "Mindfulness"
date: 2022-12-16T05:26:15Z
draft: false
weight: 40
---
Despite the angel’s kiss I didn’t suddenly declare myself spiritual. So how did I start to awaken? After the power and glory of that moment, I tried to go back to my life as a software engineer. A life that did not have any room for spirit in it.  Even though I now had overwhelming evidence of spirit, it was just too much. I packed it into a box and stacked it way, way back in the closet of my mind. But bits and pieces of it kept on leaking out. And then more. I knew on some level that I was not an atheist any more but I didn’t really want to think about it. It was too much. Over many years (this would have been greatly speed up if I had just done the process consciously) I would recognize from time to time my spiritual intuitions coming up. And eventually I just started to allow them. Maybe not for very long, but I started to just allow that I had now another way of looking at the world. Then I let myself start to investigate what these spiritual longings were all about, and the fear that came up with them.

I needed a little nurturing around the fear, but what I needed most was to really trust myself. To trust that this new way of looking at the world was just as valid as anything my rational mind came up with. To really trust that I loved myself way too much to ever forsake the rational/logical side of myself. Even as I started to venture off into these new worlds of spirit, I promises myself over and over that I would not forsake the other parts of me. This is the nurture/need step of [RAIN][1]. It was so necessary.  It let me start to integrate this whole new world of spirit. It let me accept that I am extremely intuitive and can at times sense people’s energy. I started to integrate this spiritual side of me. Really let myself bring both spirit and rationality into how I decide if something is true. And I realized that I was not just a rationalist or someone having a spiritual awakening. I was both and more. And I started to get curious, just how big am I? Just how big is everyone if they only knew? And then I go back to gratitude for finding all of this. What a gift. What a gift all of this is. I’m so very grateful.

## Many Paths

Finding your connection with spirit, is a very personal thing. No one can do it for you. You first need to be open to the possibility of spirit even existing. If your heart and mind are firmly closed to it then it won’t happen. So the very first step is to simply start to notice. When does Spirit touch you? It usually is nothing so dramatic as an angel’s kiss. Usually it is so much more subtle, but it is none the less just as powerful. We think that maybe Spirit only shows up in a church or certain rituals, but  in fact it can show up anywhere. Maybe we feel it when we look up and up at that tree. Maybe we feel it when we are full up in love with our child. Maybe we feel it when we dance around and around in a circle with others. 

### Partner’s story

My partner would not describe herself as spiritual, but I don’t think that is true. She just isn’t religious; she is actually quite spiritual in her own way. She recently completed the arduous, 500 mile [Camino][2] walk in 39 days. It changed her. She carried a stone to commemorate the untimely death of her niece with her the whole way and then laid it down at the ocean at the end of her walk. It helped her let go of a little of her pain and grief. That is such a powerful spiritual ritual. And even though she didn’t get the traditional spiritual experience that our friend described when she did the trail, it changed her in a profound way.

She realized life is simple. We get caught up in superficialities and the things that don’t really matter and she has no patience for that now. What matter is simple and that is where she puts her focus. Coming back has been hard for both of us. There is some big change, some big shift that wants to awaken in her. And she is not completely sure what it is yet. She doesn’t want to just go back to the way things always were. She is different now. It has been a real challenge to our relationship because she doesn’t want to go back to the same partnership with me as before. But as hard as it is ultimately this is very good. This is the core of spiritual intuition — she is listening to a deep knowing of what is alive in her.

She lives to dance. Every year she spends a week teaching dance at a family summer camp. All of the dancing is done to live music. Kids grow up in that camp and love it so much that they come back later as teachers. When I first attended the camp I asked some people why they were so into dancing. With their face glowing people described these perfect, ecstatic moments where they are one with the music and one with everyone swirling around them. I never knew it before then, but dance can be such a profoundly spiritual practice.


[1]:	/cleaning-up/purple-wisdom-work/mindfulness/
[2]:	https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Camino_de_Santiago