---
title: "Who Am I?"
date: 2020-29-17T15:26:15Z
draft: false
weight: 20
---
Before I go into the plan, I think it is useful maybe even necessary to talk a little about myself first. Who is this person dreaming such a big dream? What particular viewpoint am I coming from?

I'm a 58 year old white male living in the Bay Area. I have two kids (Ulysses and Jaiya) from separate marriages and they are the world to me. I've been a software programmer most of my life, and I love programming. I'm book smart so I did well academically. I am a seeker of Truth. When I was younger I was in a lot of pain. The way I found myself out of that pain was doing intensive personal growth workshops. It was the only thing that seemed to work. I tried a few Freudian psychiatrists but their approach seemed (and still does frankly) like mostly nonsense. So personal growth workshops it was. And I did a lot of them. The month of my 50th birthday I did a particularly powerful workshop and I stepped into a lot of joy. I finally committed to fully loving myself and others. It was a kind of spiritual awakening, and brought me into a new phase of my life. Suddenly it was easy to lose weight because that was the most loving thing to do for myself. And then a few years later I did psychedelic Medicine work and went into even deeper joy. Now that I am mostly out of pain, my focus has shifted to service. I want to help people not just find their way out of pain, but into their own joy. It is right there waiting for all of us. Just begging to be let in. Somehow, someway I want to help that happen. After taking a number of trainings I am just now embarking on a side practice as Medicine guide. I am also deepening my meditation practice and after some more trainings I would like to teach [Mindful Self Compassion](https://centerformsc.org/).

And then there is my spiritual awakening. People who really know me describe me as very love based. I find that description perplexing. It is true, but it is kind of like saying I am very oxygen based. Of course I am oxygen based! I am quite attached to breathing. But so are you! And just like we sometimes forget to stop and really let ourselves breathe, we also quite often forget to stop and let ourselves really love. To me it seems obvious that everything is Love. Everything. We come from Love and return to Love. You know this to be true. Yes really. There are maybe only fleeting moments when this was really clear to you, but then as we all do you forgot. The trick is to forget less and less. I promise you there is an immense amount of joy to be found in the remembering.

So why talk about myself? Because this site is meant to be a practical example of what I am asking for. The world I hope to help create is going to require all of me. The engineer, the personal growth explorer, and the spiritual dreamer. All of me. But of course all by myself I can accomplish nothing. So I need to inspire you to bring in all of yourself. What unique combination of gifts are you for the world? How can we deepen and strengthen all that you have to offer?. We need all of you. And together I want to create a world that truly welcomes and celebrates the wild diversity and richness of the world. We need all of us.

## Explorer

I am also an explorer. I named myself Odysseus because he is the archetype of embarking on an odyssey. My purpose is to climb tall mountains and to leap into worlds unknown to chart the course for others to follow. That is what I am doing here. I do feel like I have climbed a number of mountains and leapt off of them. And truly I look at all the people who have gone so much farther than me and wonder who I am to try and talk about these mountains. But it is now time for me to do some charting. I have some things that are worth passing on. And in fact switching to this new role feels like a very scary new mountain to leap off of.

Living in Japan, married to a Japanese woman and raising our son was one of the mountains I jumped off of. I got culture shock twice in Japan. The first time was on first arriving there. Everything was so different there, and I had never been to a truly foreign country before. It was a fairly mild shock. The second, much bigger shock happened a year later just as my Japanese was starting to get good enough to give me a glimpse of how truly different the Japanese view the world than Americans do. I woke up to how I just assumed there was only one world view and that was my American way of looking at things. That is so not true! The Japanese do not view the world as a bunch of individuals making their way, they instead see the world through a much, much more group focus. The purpose of life is not just a selfish pursuit of individual happiness. I don't think either the American or Japanese perspective is wrong. From what I could tell there is a mix of profound benefits and costs to each. But what it did was to open my eyes to how differently people can view this world.


## Personal Growth

I have a personal growth mindset. What do I mean by that? I believe that living is something that we can get better at. There is a real savor to getting more skillful at being with all the things that come. I also know that we contain vast multitudes within us, and who we chose to be moment to moment to be is governed more than we realize by personal preference. There are areas within us that we feel more comfortable hanging out in. It is possible for us to go to other places, but we mostly chose not to. And that is perfectly OK.

I know from personal experience that immense, astonishing change is possible. Everything felt different and yet in some important ways nothing changed at all. I was still me but maybe now living in that little bigger place of possibility. And just to be very clear my imperfections did not get washed away in each transformation. What I call my "bullshit" is still very much here.

## Spirituality

From an early age I have always felt a call to follow Truth no matter where it leads. Because of that I fell in love with science. What I love best about science is that it knows that finding truth is inherently hard and you can always find out that you were wrong. You are called on to abandon even your most cherished theories and models if new contradictory evidence comes to light.  This ability to admit you were wrong is so critical to getting to Truth.

Earlier in my life I was an atheist, because of course I was. Religion as it was presented to me seemed mostly like superstitious nonsense. And yet there were these strong hints that maybe just maybe I was missing something. I tell my waking up story [here](http://www.cosmosgame.org), but the key point is that as I paid more attention to what true in me, I had to admit that I am deeply spiritual. We all are, but most of us tend to forget it. We have brief moments, mabye in nature, maybe at a birth or death, where we know that we are all part of something much, much bigger. But then we forget and fall asleep again. How to wake people up?

As I was coming back to normal space from my very first guided psychedelic journey I knew I had finally found the answer. Medicine work, if properly done is a safe way to let people directly experience what I am talking about. This kind of therapy is going to profoundly change the world. Why am I so confident about this? Because it already has. The 1960's was a fascinating decade. It started out in the conformity of the post war 1950's but ended up radically changing the world. Think of the difference between early Beatle songs like [She Loves You](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/She_Loves_You) (1963) and [I am the Walrus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/I_Am_the_Walrus) (1967). Only four years apart and yet these songs are in completely different worlds. And it started with psychedelics, like LSD and Peyote.  Unfortunately this medicine is so powerful that it can cause damage if not treated with the proper respect. So many people hurt themselves just playing with this powerful medicine and there was a strong backlash.

But in recent years, sober patient therapists have shown that if done with profound respect and care pschedelic therapy can have life changing effects. Many people who have struggled to heal for years and years in therapy are now finally finding their way to internal peace. This gives me so much hope.

## Engineer

While I was participating in all those workshops and having those spiritual breakthroughs I was always a little ashamed of being an engineer. It seemed like something so different from what the world needed. I thought the world needed more therapists and gifted workshop leaders, not more computer programmers. And it does. But the world needs many things right now. It turns out that engineers can offer something as well. In fact when I looked closer, there are a surprising number of things that programmers can teach the world. I talk about that in a separate [post](/save-the-world/posts/programmers-path), but the key thing to know here is that I bring an engineer's practical, result oriented mindset to this project. I know the critical importance of theory, but I also know not to bring too much in. I have done a lot of reading, and I am happy to do a lot more if you have suggestions, but all that reading needs to be distilled down into the simplest and most practical plan that can work. And software engineers know how critically important it is to get feedback because software gets better and better the more eyes you put on it. And the best way to harness that phenomenon? Open Source.
