---
title: "Cleaning Up"
date: 2022-02-01T05:26:15Z
draft: false
weight: 30
---
If you haven't watched the stink spirit video from Spirited Away yet please consider [watching it now](https://www.facebook.com/FansOfStudioGhibli/videos/spirited-away-bathhouse-clip/493650414055324/). It is such a good metaphor for this work.

We all have a lifetime of accumulated junk that is keeping us from our true shining nature. Notice how much courage and fortitude is needed just to get started. It feels kind of hopeless. I'm not worth the effort! But the pain keeps driving us forward. I love how the whole community rallied to help with cleaning up the stink spirit. I've had a community stand up for me too. I could not get there all on my own. We can't get there all on our own.

Back at a time when I was in an incredible amount of pain, I signed up for an intensive set of personal growth workshops. The first weekend was designed to open us up to the work and the second, longer retreat was where we did the real work. That retreat was called "The Wall" and it was named after the "wall" of exhaustion that runners hit and then keep on going. It was described as a chasm mountain climbers might find on their path. Giving them no real choice other than to leap over the chasm. And in that moment when they are in the air new possibilities open up.

We met at Sea-Tac airport to take a bus to a remote camp somewhere in Washington state. We didn't really know  where we were going exactly. Just somewhere deep into the woods. We slept in bunkbeds and were woken up at 6am to the shrill whistle of our facilitator dressed as a coach and set out on our daily run. Which was timed. And the times were posted. Fairly early in the retreat the facilitator asked us to commit to our life purpose. If we didn't already know our life purpose he suggested we take on the purpose of living a deep, rich, fulfilling life. He asked us to take a solitary walk out into nature to really think about this. When we came back the facilitator said, "Everyone who is willing to commit to their life purpose please stand." Everyone stood but me. I looked around a little in amazement -- how could everyone so easily stand? It didn't seem fair. This was way too early in the retreat. Didn't people understand what they were committing to? This was it. If I committed to this everything else was a detail. Hard, difficult details, but honestly? details.  

I had only fairly recently returned from Japan and was still married to my Japanese wife. She was deeply wounded and was emotionally and physically abusive to both my son and me. Our family was suffering. I was stumping along on duty and would have secretly welcomed a death by cancer as an honorable way out. I wanted to get divorced, but what if she returned to Japan with our son? I talked to expensive lawyers who warned me that sexism was alive and well in the courts and that the presumption was still that the child should be with his mother so there was little I could do to prevent her from taking our child. And to be honest I also shared that same sexism that assumed that a child needs to be with his mom no matter how troubled the mom is. And my son desperately needed me. I was his safe place.

So no. That commitment sounded lovely for others, but I didn't have that luxury. I had a son who was counting on me. At the time my word was impeccable. If I said I would do something, I really would. And making that commitment meant I would hurt my son. And yet. Someone asked what I would want for my son to do if he happened to end up in my same position? Would I want him to make the same choice I was? No, I wouldn't want this for him. And someone else asked me what are you teaching him by your example? If you don't choose a fulfilling life how he is he going to learn to choose that for himself? He is looking to you for how life is done. And finally the instructor simply called me to the front of the room and asked everyone who thought that I deserved to lead a deep, rich fulfilling life to stand up. And everyone stood. I sobbed and something flipped inside of me and I found I could say yes.

This was such an incredibly important commitment! How could I make sure that I really honored it? I mulled this over or a week or so after the workshop until one day at work I was transferring to a new group that happened to already have two Davids so my new boss jokingly said "You will have to change your name". I looked at him thunderstruck and said "You're right!" He quickly tried to backpedal assuring me that he was just joking but I knew he was absolutely right. It was time to change my name.

My birth name is David. It is a perfectly lovely name. Unfortunately my generation is over blessed with them. Back in high school there were so many Davids in my Biology class every time the teacher said "David?" something like 20% of the class turned his way. Ridiculous! Too many Davids! I stomped off to the library and looked through names. Aureolus? No. Borealis? No. Chrysostom? Maybe? ... no. Odysseus? Something electric went through me. Yes. Yes that. Ok good, so when? When am I going to make this huge change? Not now -- not while I'm in still in high school. It's way too scary. But sometime in my life something big will happen and I will know it is time.

And now finally it was that time. I changed my name to Odysseus. That was the easy part. Keeping my wife in the US turned out to be easy too. I ended up buying my way out of the problem. I used my stock options to buy our house and give it to her. I also paid for all her expenses. Moving out when my son didn't want me to go was the hardest thing I have ever done. I still cry about it. But it is what I would want for him. And I did find my way to a deep, rich fulfilling life. He got to saw me thriving and happy, and I remained his safe place. Making that commitment to myself was the key thing. Everything else was a detail. Incredibly hard details but details none the less.

People often ask me about my name and every time I am reminded of this first, very sacred promise I made. I'm grateful for the question. It gives me a chance to recommit yet once again. By the way, that whole bit about getting woken up by a coach with a whistle? Brilliant theater. At the end of the retreat the facilitator confessed that every morning he would put on his athletic gear, send us on our way and then immediately change back out. Just to help us notice the unconscious stories we so quickly fall into. Notice how we just assumed we were supposed to run as fast as we possibly could. We were getting timed! We didn't even consider the possibility that the run could be a time of connection and playfulness until the final day. We don't have to stay in our stories. We don't have to keep on running for our lives.

Things do come up and we all find ourselves running away in fear. But if we are committed, at some point we come back and try again. And again. So I'm asking you. If you already know your life purpose, great, please recommit to that. Otherwise would you be willing take on the purpose of leading a deep rich, fulfilling life? Are you willing to really, seriously commit to that? I warn you that committing to that means all the scary things you have been putting off will have to be handled. But the good news? They will now be details. Hard, scary details yes, but details.
