---
title: "Mind/Body"
date: 2022-22-01T05:26:15Z
draft: false
weight: 60
---
We have this weird illusion that somehow our body is separate from our mind. As if they are separate things. What a strange story we tell ourselves. It is so not true. What happens in our body affects our Mind. What happens in our Mind affects our body. It is all one.
When we suffer a traumatic event we store that trauma somewhere in our body. In his book [The body keeps the score](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Body_Keeps_the_Score), the psychiatrist  Bessel van der Kolk talks about how when he first started out as a therapist working with traumatized people, his profession didn't have much to offer. They didn't even really recognize that PTSD was a real thing. That has changed. In the second half of his book he talks about the many, many different and promising therapy options for traumatized people we have now. This is huge. Maybe for the first time since the start of Red empire we have the chance to finally stop the cycle of one generation passing it's trauma on to the next. And as different as these therapy options are they do share one thing -- they help people connect their bodies back into the world.

I worked with a very, very traumatized young woman struggling to recover from extreme childhood PTSD. When she told me her history I would weep with horror -- it was just too much. How could anyone possibly recover from that!? And she suspected that her crippling illnesses were all that trauma still living on inside her body. We used MDMA as sacred medicine and she had an amazingly rich journey. She discovered a nurturing, holy connection with her body and her face glowed with joy. Up until then her body had only been a source of pain, something she had to learn to manage and hold off. For as long as she could remember her body never had enough heat and was always cold. Now she had plenty. For over a year after that journey we simply did Hakomi to help her find her way back to her body. Simply remembering her sacred journey was all that it usually took. This discovery changed her life. She still had her medical challenges, but now she was able to step into the world in a much bigger way. It starts with the body.

And then there is sex. Our society does not handle sex very well. Most of us have unprocessed sexual shame. We have a lot of healing to do here -- sex is yet another way we are disconnected from our bodies.  But sex is so fundamental. We can not get to the world we want without reclaiming its sacred nature. Because we have such a weird energy around sex it blocks intimacy with others. It holds us back from something as simple and basic as touch -- something all humans need and yet we are starving ourselves for it. In my first HAI workshop I found myself naked, straddled with another naked man, and stroking his face with deep love. It was very hard. I had never done that with a man before. It was so clear to me that this was not sexual, but it was so intimate. I had never been so intimate with someone without it leading to sex. And I had a big aha! moment -- sex and intimacy are different. Maybe I sort of understood that in my head, but now I finally got it all the way. Got that deep down I had thought that the only way I could have true intimacy was sex. What a limiting belief that was! It meant that the only possible source of intimacy I could have was with my wife when we were having sex. No wonder I was so desperate for sex! Yes, I had a strong sex drive but what was really driving me was my desperate need for intimacy. And our sex life was not working -- that hurt so bad and I was angry about it. When I got home from the workshop a miracle occurred. In one wild moment I was able to let go all of that anger and hurt. Suddenly I understood that having sex didn't mean she didn't love me. I knew that she did. Sex and intimacy are different.

People need to feel strong in their bodies before they can do the bigger healing work. The new culture we create has to start with this. An important part of this is healing our relationship with food and drink. We need to help people find a way to eat and drink in a way that best supports them. Have them really pay attention to what happens take something into their body. For example I was in denial about my developing pre-diabetes until one day I took my son and his girlfriend out to a Thai restaurant. When we came back to his dorm room I had to crash on the couch -- I was in a food coma. He started talking to his girlfriend as if I were not there saying "This is not right", and there I was feebly thinking "I am still right here you know!" but not having the energy to say it out loud. It turns out that my body can no longer properly do the whole insulin thing that needs to happen when you eat sugar. I do much, much better when I eat low carb. Most people don't have it as bad as I do, but many people would find they feel much better if they cut back on their sugar/carb consumption.

And our bodies need to move. The health benefits of even mild exercise are very well documented. And yet most of us don't exercise enough. Why is that? It is because exercise is treated like an extra thing to be tacked on to an already busy schedule. The trick is to weave it into our lives. For most of my working life I made sure that biking was part of my daily commute. And at work I always took the stairs instead of the elevator. Simple but very effective. No willpower needed to do exercise it was just part of my daily routine. We do so much better when we feel physically strong. I started doing weight lifting at a gym and noticed how much stronger it made me feel mentally. I struggle sometimes with depression, and I notice that if I can just manage to go on a short run that makes me feel better which lets me do other things that make me feel better which starts a virtuous cycle that pulls me out of that depression.

All of this is pretty obvious. We know all of this already. But what we are not doing is bringing all of this together. Instead we we hold all of these things separate. Therapy is kept strictly separate from nutritional counseling is kept strictly separate from body work. That doesn't work. The new culture we create has to bring the body in as the place we start from. Where are you with your body? How are you treating it? Where do you feel shame about your body? Are you regularly moving your body? Are you in touch with your true sexual nature? Are you getting enough touch? Before we heal the world we have to heal ourselves. And a big part of that healing is healing our relationship with our body.

So how do we teach people that? It has to be experiential. People need to experience it in their bodies to truly understand it. But it won't be just one method.  Different approaches will work best for different people. For example, HAI does a fantastic job of getting people in intimate relationship with their body, but for many people getting naked in front of a group of strangers is just a non-starter. There is simply no way they are going to sign up for that. Similarly a sacred MDMA or mushroom journey can offer incredibly healing, but again for many people that kind of journey is way too scary. So we have to meet people where they are at. We will have to make sure that for each person we find things that helps them with diet, movement, sex, and substance abuse. Each person will have something tailored for them, and it will be part of an integrated plan -- not something that is held separate. Because all of our work is connected. We might think that maybe we just need to work on, for example, our relationship with our partner, but it is an illusion that we can work on just one thing isolated from everything else.  What happens in our body affects our Mind. What happens in our Mind affects our body.

All of the body therapy approaches share a focus on getting people to pay attention to their body. Getting people to notice moment from moment with exquisite detail what is happening right now. Noticing what wants to happen next. There is an incredible wisdom to listening to that. Hakomi has kind of weird word for this. They call it "organicity". I will talk about that next.
