---
title: "Truth"
date: 2022-22-01T05:26:15Z
draft: false
weight: 40
---
We need to find our truth before we can heal. Hakomi gently guides clients deeper and deeper into a non ordinary state of consciousness that helps them get all the way down to their core beliefs. These are the (mostly) unconscious beliefs people have about how the world works. What is and is not safe. These beliefs are usually created by a child desperately trying to survive against unfair odds. So we honor the genius of that child for finding something that worked, but then help them see how that solution also has come with a price. A price that now maybe is not worth it. We then have them notice that they as adults have many more resources now and can now find other solutions. But first maybe they just need to spend some time soothing that hurt child within and reassuring that child they are safe now.

HAI workshops revolve around group shares. People stand up in front of the group (usually stark naked) and are lovingly encouraged to share from the most vulnerable, authentic place they can find within themselves. Quite often people are inspired to stand up after having a breakthough during one of the exercises. Or maybe they are moved to share their most painful secret. There is something incredibly beautiful about sharing your deepest, naked Truth in front of a circle of sacred witnesses. A circle that holds all of you in love. This group support helped me to get to my deeper places. Helped me get clearer about what was really going on for me. When I stood up sometimes it was like something was speaking through me. Afterwards I would sit down and run through what I just said because it was what I most needed to hear.

Getting to the truth of the matter can be hard and scary. We tend to resist. And there are good reasons we conspire within ourselves to not know the full truth. This work if done incorrectly is not safe. Unless we can be compassionate and non-violent with all that we discover it actually might be a good idea to not let ourselves consciously know. But that conspiracy blocks the healing that needs to happen. What to do? In my Medicine Guide training we were taught to work with two medicines, MDMA and mushrooms. MDMA works on the relationship plane, the world of emotions and how we connect to others. It also helps us process our traumatic memories -- it is very promising for PTSD example. We first start clients with MDMA journey work. This establishes a safe ground for them and helps to build a strong, loving bond with them to build up their trust. We also need to discover and work through whatever traumatic memories they need to process. The ones that have been too hard to deal with up to now. MDMA calms the ever vigilent amygdyla enough to allow these memories through, it also turns up oxytocin, the love hormone, to open their hearts wide enough to be fully compassionate with themselves. Trauma memories are different than normal memories in that they get "stuck". People relive their war incident or car accident as if it had happened just a moment ago. Under MDMA they get the opportunity to work through these memories with their therapist and convert them to more normal memories. Trauma never goes away, but you can shift and transform it to a healthier place. And even if you don't have full on trauma, almost all of us have places of such deep shame or anguish that we can't stand to go there.

Once we have established a safe ground in the relationship plane it is time to venture up into the higher mystery. Plant medicine trips are all about getting to the deeper Truth of the matter. Sometimes we need to really open ourselves to the universe in a really vulnerable way before we can get to the heart of the matter. Find out what is really going on with us. And when we finally get there we can no longer stay in that old story that was not serving. No longer can pretend we are always asleep and not aware. Plant medicine is especially good for that. The trick is to find a way to make it safe. We can really hurt ourselves if we are not careful.

Think of people you know in your life who are struggling. Almost always they are not letting themselves know something important. Maybe they are verging on alchoholism or other addictive behaviors. Maybe they are so consumed with fear that they don't see how they are only focused on themselves and oblivious to the harm they are causing to others. It is so obvious to us as observers, but they are not letting themselves know it. We can try to compassionately help them find their Truth but this is something ultimately they have to find within themself.  We can't do it for them. And sometimes things have to get very bad indeed before they finally get there.

So all of these schools are working to get people to their deeper Truth. Get them past whatever is blocking them from getting there. Without ever explicitly mentioning it they also are teaching people to get into the habit of always checking inside for their Truth. To get in the habit of paying attentiong to what is going on inside. Encouraging them to take frequent pauses to check in with themselves. There is a name for this practice -- it is call mindfulness. Let's talk about that next.
