---
title: "Loving Presence"
date: 2022-22-01T05:26:15Z
draft: false
weight: 90
---
> “People will only protect what they love.”
 Jacques Coustea

In my early thirties I started to lose the ability to run. I was working at a very stressful job at Microsoft back in its glory days and my daily long, hard run was my lifeline. It kept me sane. And I was no longer able to run so hard. Heck I was even starting to have problems just walking. I was also having to pee all the time. My neck hurt. My HMO doctor trying to save money for the corporation quickly dismissed the problem as sitting with poor posture at my computer and sent me to a physical therapist. Which was complete nonsense. I still had excellent posture from my early Zen practice, and besides I really was in pain. Fortunately the physical therapist was competent and quickly recognized that something was very wrong and managed to get me into the then very expensive MRI lab. They put me in this narrow tube and scanned me for a long time. The scanning technician was astonished at how happy I was when they told me they had found a tumor. I was just so happy that we now knew what was going on and that we might be able to address it.

The tumor was taking over the c4 bone in my spine and if we did not take it out it was going to kill me. They were going to have to remove all the nerves coming out of the left side of the c4 plus a lot of the bone. That meant I was likely to lose a lot of functionality in my left arm. One doctor told me it was hopeless. A test book case of what happens when you remove so many nerves. Another, wiser doctor told me to not give up hope that the body will try very hard to find a way. My brother-in-law is a doctor and researched the prognosis for this particular kind of tumor. I found out later he told my parents the prognosis was not good so they were all very worried. My family came up for the surgery and to nurse me afterwards. Fortunatey they were there right before I went into surgery and got the nurse to recognize that I was swelling up bright red -- I was having a severe allergic reaction to an anti-biotic they had given me. Not an auspicious beginning.

Coming out of surgery I was placed into the ICU late at night. The doctor (the wise one) had had to work many extra hours to tease out all of the tumor. It had really embedded itself. I had hoped maybe not all the nerves would need to be removed but that just was not possible. They were all gone. The good news was that the tumor was not malignant, and that I was still alive. Except for maybe my left arm the prognosis was now good. I lay in bed wondering about my arm. I remembered my mirror work and started to pour love into that poor arm. And I found I had a lot of love to give it. So grateful for it, feeling compassion for the injury done to it. I eventually drifted towards sleep but in the bed next was an elderly man who was struggling The nurse kept on coming in with a very calm, but urgent voice telling that man to breathe more. The implication was that if he didn't breathe more he was going to die right that night. I will never forget that nurse's calm, insistent voice trying to coax that man to breathe more.
