---
title: "Nonviolence"
date: 2022-03-01T05:26:15Z
draft: false
weight: 30
---

As I write this bombs are falling on Ukranian homes. Families are huddled in subways just trying to survive, and millions upon millions of people have fled the country. We cheer as we watch the Ukranians bravely fight back against what seem hopeless odds. Sometimes there is no choice but to meet violence with violence. In World War II most of the world had collapsed into authoritarian Red. The only thing that saved us was armed conflict; nothing else would do against Hitler and Tojo. Unbelievable numbers of people died in the resistance but it was sadly necessary. What we forget is that most of the people we were fighting, the Germans, the Japanese, believed that they too were doing the hard but necessary thing. They also were dying for something they believed in. When it gets this bad we have no choice but to fight. But our goal is to create a world where it doesn't get that bad. How do we do that? Again, we need systems thinking. We need to go deep enough to really get to the root of the problem. And as always that leads us right back to ourselves.

This war mentality is not just something that lives out there disconnected from everything else. We also have wars in our own minds. Of course we do! This is where war springs from -- where else would it come from? And just like those determined Germans thinking they were doing the hard but necessary work of fixing the world, we sometimes declare war on ourselves thinking it is the only way. I know because I did myself. I declared war on myself in high school, and I am still recovering from it. In my Junior year I started to develop huge cystic acne cysts. They would swell so big that they stretched the skin of my face and made it painful to smile. They grew almost to the size of ping pong balls -- I am not exaggerating. I went from one of the cuter boys to one of the ugliest just like that. And in my bewildered pain I made a choice to protect myself. My ugliness made me vulnerable so I decided to do a sort of amputation. To cut off the part of me that cared about how I looked. So I stared into the mirror and told myself over and over "You are ugly". I was trying to toughen myself. This got all the way in because it was actually done with loving intent -- I didn't want anyone to be able to hurt me. And I was so sure it needed to be done. That it was the only way to protect myself. But it actually destroyed me. I'm not alone. So many of us attack and belittle ourselves. We tell ourselves stories about how unattractive we are, or stupid, or lazy or whatever. And it really hurts. This pain is real and it cripples us. We can't start to heal until we stop this violence within.

And violence has no place with our children. None whatsoever. And yet we stand by and watch children get hit or screamed at. Stand by and watch as if those kids have no rights of their own. As if they are simply their parent's property to do with as they please. And how did those parents end up like that? From their own parents. It is a long, sad cycle of pain. Putin's childhood was [quite harsh](https://acestoohigh.com/2022/03/02/how-vladimir-putins-childhood-is-affecting-us-all/). He grew up in a traumatizing environment where he was abandoned and bullied. The psychologists, Alice Miller [writes](https://www.alice-miller.com/en/the-ignorance-or-how-we-produce-the-evil/):

>"Children who are given love, respect, understanding, kindness, and warmth will naturally develop different characteristics from those who experience neglect, contempt, violence or abuse, and never have anyone they can turn to for kindness and affection. Such absence of trust and love is a common denominator in the formative years of all the dictators I have studied."

She goes on to talk about how harsh Hitler and Stalin's childhoods were and how that inevitably lead to their acting out later. We seem to have a huge blindspot here. Again the revolutionary vanguard has to have preschool and kindergarden teachers leading the way. We are not going to get to the world we want without vastly better child raising.

But violence can be more subtle as well. It can show up when trying to help people. There sometimes is tremendous temptation to help people along by getting a little tough with them for their own good. Maybe hold them accountable for what they said they would do but didn't. Maybe point them in the direction they need to go and push them a little. Some personal growth workshops take this approach and for a brief time people will have remarkable results. But the results don't last. This is not the path to healing. Not really. And sometimes when we push too hard we hurt people. I had a friend badly wounded by the [Landmark Forum](https://www.landmarkworldwide.com/). They pushed her so hard she had a nervous breakdown.

People are ready to do their work when they are ready for it. It does not help to push them along, in fact it often make things worse. Certainly it is important to help guide people, but we must always respect and honor their internal knowing. They know what is best for themselves at any given moment. They are the ones doing the healing, not us. We merely are helping them find their way.  We must meet people where they are, and invite (not push) them forward toward what they truly want for their lives. It has to come from within. Unfortunately this is not yet universally recognized in the world of healers. There are groups that still think that at times you need to really challenge people. I really understand that temptation because sometimes I feel it strongly myself. But it is ultimately a false path. True change has to come from within. We can not force it.

And there has to be trust. All parts of us need to know that it is safe. A Hakomi practitioner works skillfully with the many parts of us. The initial sessions quite often are about letting the client realize how truly safe they are. And that lets the process go to the very deep places where quite often we find the need to have a conversation between our hurt child and our adult. The therapist facilitates this conversation -- it is oddly kind of like couples therapy. Both parts need to hear from the other and be reassured that they are loved. Both need to learn how to better listen to the other. And there are more parts in us than just the child and the adult. Coaxing them out into the open is exquisite, delicate work and even the slightest hint of forcing can shut the whole process down.

HAI works the same way. Hai welcomes and loves us just as we are. HAI workshops are a safe place for people to really show up fully. HAI presenters model loving, compassionate connection from the very beginning of a workshop. It turns out that quit often the biggest work people have to do is to stop the violence within. Stop the hurtful commentary that many of us having running all the time without even really realizing it. We have so many warzones within us, no wonder the world has so many warzones without. When we call a cease fire within we create the space to find out what is going on with ourselves. Without this ceasefire we need to keep things secret from ourselves lest we use that as fresh reason to beat on ourselves yet some more. So we actually have an internal conspiracy to not let ourselves know. But we do need to know. Healing doesn't work unless we get to the deeper Truth. So first we have to make it safe. Then we can do the deeper work. That is the next step.
