---
title: "Organicity"
date: 2022-22-01T05:26:15Z
draft: false
weight: 70
---
>I don’t think people are seeking the meaning of life as much as they are seeking the experience of being alive.”
Joseph Campbell

"Organicity" is an unfamiliar, awkward word, and I have to confess I initially resisted it. My partner especially dislikes it but try as we might we can't come up with an alternative. We really do need a new word here. Ignore what the dictionary might say, in this sense the word combines "organism" with "icity" to mean the nature of an organism. It focuses us on the living, natural organisms that we all are. We tend to skip right past that, but this principle brings us back over and over to the miracle of life. Brings us back to noticing what our living body is feeling and longing for. Living things are always healing. Always. Isn't that amazing? A doctor might set a broken bone, but then it is up to the body to do the healing. When a 17 year old girl who I was very close to died I was devasted. A wise grief counselor told me that we are never the same after our losses, but to know that we are always on a path towards healing. That was incredibly comforting to hear and it felt true.

When I stood in front of the room struggling to make the commitment to leading a deepr rich, meaningful life, I was really stuck. Then there was that moment when the facilitator asked, "Everyone who believes he deserves this please stand". And everyone stood up. As I stood there sobbing something shifted inside me. I could feel it. Something in me that had been blocked was now flowing. That was a moment of organicity. I was still struggling with what I had to do next, but this internal knowing was driving me forward. Guiding me.

Again, Hakomi works the same way. First it helps us get to those deep core beliefs we made when we got really, really hurt. We honor those beliefs because they got us through. We survived. But now we see maybe the cost is too high and maybe there is another way. What is this organism longing for? Trust that. What is holding us back? Work with that. What wants to happen next? We teach people to trust that internal knowing, and to follow it. For the therapist this is quite humbling. We are not the healers. We are merely the support crew. We have to surrender control -- it is a leap of faith. I struggled with this. It was surprisingly hard to simply ask my client "What wants to happen next?", and to trust that something may come to them or not and either way it was OK. I had this mistaken notion that I needed to constantly direct things. But that is not how healing works -- it always comes from within. This is the core of Hakomi. It turns out that it is the core of HAI and Forest Bathing as well.

Forest bathing guides know that it is the forest that holds the answers for their participants, they are just opening the door. The more than human world will provide exactly what is needed. People just need a little support to step into that other, liminal world that is just right there. Every organism innately knows what is best for it. And organisms need to be with each other. HAI immerses people into loving connection with themself and others. From that place of support and nonjudgment people can discover what is blocking them and move past it. When they step up, usually naked to the microphone on Sunday there quite often is a sense of new worlds opening for them.

We start by creating the safe space within (non-violence), then we simply get curious (truth), and start to watch ourselves carefully (mindfulness). That leads us to be here right now in our body (mind-body) and next we see what wants to happen next (organicity). We trust that our heart, mind, and body will lead us. And where will they lead us? We don't know, but we do know it will be something maybe very different than what we have right now. It will be a change.
