Let me start with a simple question. Why do we think the Civil War actually solved anything? Did that war really change hearts and minds?  I don't think so. Not really. Imagine the end of the U.S. Civil War. The North has just crushed the South using brutal, total war:
[Sherman's March to the Sea](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sherman%27s_March_to_the_Sea). The South surrenders  with the bitter realization that the North will stop at absolutely no unspeakable atrocity in order to totally crush them. And that truly may have been the only way to end the war. Imagine though that you are a slave owner that now has to free their slaves. Do you really awaken to your evil wickedness and acknowledge that the North was right all along? Of course you don't. I don't expect you to have sympathy at this point for the slave owner, but what about their children? Maybe you can find sympathy for them? They are growing up in a culture that teaches them a certain mindset. Why do we think that mindset would magically change? It didn't of course. Within twenty years after the war, Southern whites had regrouped and replaced the old system of slavery with a new form of economic slavery called share cropping. Yes, still better than actual slavery, but Blacks could not vote and still lived in oppression.  This is the Authoritarian mindset. Why do we think that somehow this changes? How does that even work? So of course there is ongoing, systemic racism in the U.S.  

Those people proudly waving confederate flags carry almost the exact mindset of their ancestors. They are not stupid, they know exactly what they are celebrating, but they also don't consider themselves evil. We do of course, but they definitely don't. Interesting. OK, let's take one more step back. How did slavery even become a thing? It turns out that throughout history slavery was pretty common. Greece and Rome were slave empires. In a very real way the Authoritarian mindset of the Roman empire is still very much alive. Just look at all those people waving that damn flag.

So how do we deal with this reality? Yes, completely unacceptable, but here we are. Calling people stupid and evil has not proven to be an effective method. In fact it can often make things worse -- people harden in their opposition. And once we get past stupid and evil as the easy, lazy explanations for people's behavior we can start to really understand them. And it is not just them. There are many mindsets operating in the world, not just Authoritarians. How do we navigate this? We need a map.
