# collection of snippets

My goal is to first save the world, because it needs saving. If we don't stop carbon dioxide emissions soon, billions will die. But we have to go way beyond just that because in some ways it already is too late. Climate change is now irreversible. There is no going back. We are going to have to learn to share a very different, challenging world. Simply to survive we now have no choice but to learn to care for all. Some will live in areas that benefit from climate change and many will not. We will have to learn to share everything. But this urgent necessity is also an opportunity. We can chose to create a world of our dreams. It really is possible. In fact it is our best hope of survival. I hope to convince you to join me. I need allies. This world needs allies.

 This site is meant for people who are excited by the bigger dream of what we are all collectively waking up to. Waking up to finding their bigger purpose of service. Service coming not from a place of self-sacrifice but instead from listening to the call for the deeper joy that is struggling to be born but needs some midwives.  Please join me. I can't do this alone.

So many people are already working on saving the world. But often they are only bringing just a part of themselves to the work. Many people are doing great science (Mind) based work and wondering why people are not moved by what they have discovered. They are not meeting people where they are. Many people are doing the intense healing (Body) work that is so needed, but are not aware of how they fit into the bigger picture. We need people to step into a larger world view.  Many people are doing the profound (Heart) work of loving themselves and the world. But they are learning to endure the unendurable. We need them to come back from their lofty heights and join the work.

For example, the [Prosperity Gospel](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prosperity_theology) is a very Red mindset.

We wil regain the [three primoridal freedoms](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Dawn_of_Everything):

* Freedom to move
* Freedom to disobey
* Freedom to create or transform social relationships

But that is going to take time. The great spiritual awakenings led by Jesus and Mohammed took many decades before they reached critical mass. What do we do in the meantime? Again we need to meet people where they are at. Recognize that they think differently than people at other stages. And in the U.S. it would help if we acknowledge the betrayal of the working class. There is a reason for all that anger. There is a reason why so many people in Trump counties are dying of despair. There is a class war going on and the lower classes are losing badly. Most college educated people I know came from comfortable middle class backgrounds and they have a huge blindspot here. They can't understand why people don't "vote their interest". Why do people vote against politicians who would give them more money? They don't understand that most working class people don't want to depend on government handouts, they simply want a good job that their families can depend on. A job that won't get shipped overseas like all the others. Something they can be proud of, and feel like they are an important, contributing member of society. And people are willing to rally around this. When Trump imposed harsh (and seemingly arbitrary) tariffs on China, that policy was popular with his base. Red farmers were willing to sacrifice in solidarity with their factory brothers. Unless and until Democrats address this class divide I don't see things getter any better.
