During the Trump presidency it felt like political commentators were crashing around their bedroom at night trying to get to the bathroom. Not really recognizing what they were bumping into. For example many focused too much on Trump without realizing he just represented the yearning of a huge number of Americans. Many others viewed him as a uniquely American problem, and failed to see that there has been an absolute plague of Authoritarian governments in the world recently. Others only focused on recent events without realizing that this is an age old problem. It turns out that it is rare for a democracy to not succumb to Authoritarianism collapse at some point. And even more failed to recognize that this authoritarian mindset has been with us from the very beginnings of recorded history.

We need to stop and take the time to turn on the light and see where we are. What exactly are we bumping into? We see this Authoritarian mindset, are there other mindsets that are also driving the world? We need a map. If we truly want to succeed in winning hearts and minds we need to meet people where they actually are not where we think they should be. In my experience telling people that they are stupid and evil just has not been an effective way to get them to change. Have you had a different experience? This is where theory and models can help. We need a better understanding of why people do what they do. We need to bring our thinking minds in and go much deeper than we have.

Later on I'm going to introduce a theory called Spiral Dynamics which has a very powerful explanation for much that we see in the world. It lets us understand people without resorting to just calling them stupid and evil. But right here I want to focus on the need for some theory period. Here are a few examples of questions any theory we adopt would have to help us answer:
