---
title: "The Dream"
date: 2020-30-11T15:26:15Z
draft: false
weight: 10
---

### Mr. Roger's Neighborhood

Let's start. May I have your permission to dream with me? Dream way, way, way bigger than we normally do? OK? Here is my question: What do you really want. I mean really. Yes, yes you can have a billion dollars -- boom -- now keep on going deeper. This is a dream after all so you can have anything. What do you want beyond just the personal stuff? Maybe happiness for others? How about living in a world of joy for all? Wait, you can imagine a billion dollars but not that? Stay with me here.  

I'm very clear on what I want. As I awaken spiritually my heart keeps wanting to expand yet ever a little bigger and as it expands I start to really feel the suffering of the world. And I weep. I long for the world to heal. It is what I want very most. Truly. But I confess it can feel so impossible. As if I'm asking for too much. It initially was hard for me to even visualize exactly what a healed world would look like. What to do? I very much want this. It is starting to be the basis of everything for me, and yet I find myself holding back.

Wait. I really do know the answer and I bet you do too. Here is a hint -- look to the children. I love my children with all my heart and want the world for them.  And in fact I want the world for all children. Even if you don't have children, hopefully you can feel that too. So for them? yes, with all my heart I can ask for a better world. I want an amazing, vibrant world for them. It is hard to ask for this myself, but so simple to ask on their behalf. So maybe it really is that simple. Just let our children guide us. What kind of world works best for raising children? Focus on that. What horrible secrets are we keeping from our children? Get rid of that. And better yet, someone has already created a concrete vision of this world, so I don't have to. It is called Mr. Roger's neighborhood. Sesame Street also works, but recently a great documentary and movie about Mr. Roger's neighborhood came out so it gives me something concrete to point to. I strongly recommend watching both. They complement each other:

  * [A Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Beautiful_Day_in_the_Neighborhood)
  * [Won't You Be My Neighbor?](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Won%27t_You_Be_My_Neighbor%3F_(film))

This is the essay that inspired the movie, I highly recommend it too. It is very powerful:

  * [Can you say hero?](https://www.esquire.com/entertainment/tv/a27134/can-you-say-hero-esq1198/)

Fred Roger was committed to telling every child they are beautiful and perfect just the way they are. Great start! I want the whole world to be like that. I want a world where every child grows up without trauma, safe and secure in the knowledge that they are deeply loved and cherished. I want every child to have multiple adults that love them unconditionally and who they can turn to when they are confused or hurting. Every child encouraged to flourish and taught to recognize the majesty and beauty of this world. And just like in his show I want them to know that people can work through their differences in healthy, loving, productive ways. How can we settle for anything less than a world that is healthy for our children? It is so achingly obvious that this is what we truly want.

Does this sound too naive and simple? Consider the alternative. Particularly in the U.S. Think of the shooting of little children at Sandy Hook. If you are willing and able, please really let yourself feel a little of the horror of all those dead little bodies bleeding on the ground. And it is OK if that is too much to let it in even a little -- that is my point.  We have had countless mass shootings of children. And nothing has changed. So many children dead, so many parents grieving. And somehow we are OK with this. Children mercilessly separated from their parents at the border, and then somehow the government "lost" the parents. Those orphaned children will be scarred for life. And we are somehow OK with that too. Black moms having to explain to their sons how dangerous a world it is for them. As if those boys are not all of our sons. The news on global climate change has gotten so bad that it is painful to listen to. There is a very realistic possibility that billions may die. Seriously. My daughter asks me if it makes sense to have children and I have to stop and really think about it. The answer is yes, but I feel a terrible sadness about how challenging a world she will be bringing them into. What species cares so little for its offspring? This is so not OK, but what do we do?

We need a plan. We need a really big plan. If we want to change the world it is going to take everything I have to offer. All of me. It is going to take everything you have to offer. All of you. It is going to take every person we can muster. All of us.

### All of me, All of you, All of us.

If I'm going to propose something so audacious as a plan to save the world, it is going to require all of me. I can't hold anything back. I need to bring in everything that I am. All of my mind, all of my body, and all of my heart. All of me. And all by myself I am nothing. If this has any chance of working I have to somehow inspire you to bring in all of yourself. All of your mind, body, and heart. All of you. And together as we look out at the world we need to find a way to bring everyone, yes truly everyone into it. How could it be otherwise? We need all of us. The good news is that so many people are already working on saving the world. But often they are only bringing just a part of themselves to the work. We need all of them. All of us.

Many people are doing great science (Mind) based work and wondering why people are not moved by what they have discovered. They are not meeting people where they are. Many people are doing the intense healing (Body) work that is so needed, but are not aware of how they fit into the bigger picture. We need people to step into a larger world view.  Many people are doing the profound (Heart) work of loving themselves and the world. But they are learning to endure the unendurable. We need them to come back from their lofty heights and join the work.

When I look inside myself I find vast multitudes. We are so large and full of possibilities. And yet we tend to stay with the parts we know. I am proposing that we embrace all of ourselves, and by doing so learn to recognize how vast others are as well. Let's start with Mind, Body, and Heart. That is not all that we are but it is a good way to start. The Mind is incredibly helpful in letting us see the big picture. It lets us see the patterns that led us to this spot and helps us map out what we want to do next. We need an active mind. Then there is the body where we do this urgent thing called life. This is where we need to return for our deeper healing. This is where much of our joy comes from. We need to ground ourselves in our body. And finally we need the heart that gives life meaning. This is the path that leads to love and ultimately the most important Truth is found here. We need the heart to guide us.

Spoiler alert -- if I knew some way to jump everyone to the place of deep heart awakening I would have us skip straight there. Our ultimate goal is to collectively widen the circle of compassion so wide that it includes all people and even all species. Even to those that are not born yet. Love everyone unconditionally and know that we are all one. We need the heart to ultimately guide us to this better place. That is our ultimate destination. But first we have some important steps to take. We can't all just jump there quite yet.

### We need a map

During the Trump presidency it felt like political commentators were crashing around their bedroom at night trying to get to the bathroom. Not really recognizing what they were bumping into. For example many focused too much on Trump without realizing he just represented the yearning of a huge number of Americans. Many others viewed him as a uniquely American problem, and failed to see that there has been an absolute plague of Authoritarian governments in the world recently. Others only focused on recent events without realizing that this is an age old problem. It turns out that it is rare for a democracy to not succumb to Authoritarianism collapse at some point. And even more failed to recognize that this Authoritarian mindset has been with us from the very beginnings of history.

We need to stop and take the time to turn on the light and see where we are. What exactly are we bumping into? We see this Authoritarian mindset, are there other mindsets that are also driving the world? We need a map.  The stakes are huge. Peoples lives literally depend on us getting this right. If we truly want to succeed in winning hearts and minds we need to meet people where they actually are not where we think they should be. In my experience telling people that they are stupid and evil just has not been an effective way to get them to change. Have you had a different experience? Truly committing to changing the world requires truly changing ourself first. And the very first step on that path is to find a better understanding of people. We need an understanding that does not simply brand those misbehaving others as stupid and evil.

A theory called Spiral Dynamics has a very powerful explanation for much that we see in the world. Despite the fact that the theory was mostly finished by the 1990's it is only now starting to get recognized. It lets us understand people without resorting to just calling them stupid and evil. I will explain the full model later, but first let me focus on one concrete example. My hope is to inspire curiosity in you.

Let me start with a simple question. Why do we think the Civil War actually solved anything? Did that war really change hearts and minds?  I don't think so. Not really. Imagine the end of the U.S. Civil War. The North has just crushed the South using brutal, total war:
[Sherman's March to the Sea](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sherman%27s_March_to_the_Sea). The South surrenders  with the bitter realization that the North will stop at absolutely no unspeakable atrocity in order to totally crush them. And that truly may have been the only way to end the war. Imagine though that you are a slave owner that now has to free their slaves. Do you really awaken to your evil wickedness and acknowledge that the North was right all along? Of course you don't. I don't expect you to have sympathy at this point for the slave owner, but what about their children? Maybe you can find sympathy for them? They are growing up in a culture that teaches them a certain mindset. Why do we think that mindset would magically change? It didn't of course. Within twenty years after the war, Southern whites had regrouped and replaced the old system of slavery with a new form of economic slavery called share cropping. Yes, still better than actual slavery, but Blacks could not vote and still lived in oppression.  This is the Authoritarian mindset. Why do we think that somehow this changes? How does that even work? So of course there is ongoing, systemic racism in the U.S.  

Those people proudly waving confederate flags carry almost the exact mindset of their ancestors. They are not stupid, they know exactly what they are celebrating, but they also don't consider themselves evil. We do of course, but they definitely don't. Interesting. OK, let's take one more step back. How did slavery even become a thing? It turns out that throughout history slavery was pretty common. Greece and Rome were slave empires. In a very real way the Authoritarian mindset of the Roman empire is still very much alive. Just look at all those people waving that damn flag.

So how do we deal with this reality? Yes, completely unacceptable, but here we are. Calling people stupid and evil has not proven to be an effective method. In fact it can often make things worse -- people harden in their opposition. And once we get past stupid and evil as the easy, lazy explanations for people's behavior we can start to really understand them. And it is not just them. There are many mindsets operating in the world, not just Authoritarians. How do we navigate this? We need a map.

### Heal and Grow

But of course racism does not just come from an Authoritarian mindset. When you look a little bit deeper into the problem, I suspect you will see what I see. People who are in a whole lot of pain. It is not natural to live in that kind of hate. A lot of that hateful behavior is acting out from pain. So why are they hurting?

A big part of the problem is that each generation is still working through the deep pain of the last.
It is not just lack of understanding of others that is holding us back. We also need to talk about how much trauma we collectively hold. Almost all of our trauma comes from people like our parents and grandparents. And where did they get it? From people in their past, and those people got it from their elders in a long chain of ongoing misery. We need to acknowledge this collective trauma. It runs very deep. Some communities and groups have a heavier burden to bear than others. Imagine the incredible pain of being Black in America, for example. But those white slave masters were passing on enormous trauma to their children too. It turn out that just about all of us receive some sort of trauma from our parents and other loved ones. It is a very harsh truth. Hurt people hurt people. And quite often the people we hurt most are our children. We need to stop this cycle.

Beyond the trauma cycle, it is possible for everyone to have some measure of joy. It is actually possible to teach people how to lead a deep, rich, fulfilling life. Let me say that again. Happiness and Joy are teachable skills. There is a whole lot of unnecessary suffering going on in the world. We have always had teachers that had part of the solution, but very recently even more of the pieces of the puzzle are falling into place. We can actually teach people how to climb out of their suffering. I weep at how much unnecessary suffering there is in the world.

So using the child perspective, let's create a world where every child can grow and explore to their hearts content. Let's make sure every child (and adult) gets to deeply love both themselves, others and the world at large. And when the inevitable pain and heart break comes, because yes the world will still be like that, lets make sure they have the tools and support to get through that pain, and help them come back even stronger into a rich, fully lived life.


### Reclaim spirituality

And yet again I acknowledge how impossibly large and wild a dream all of this. How can it possibly work? Doesn't it require a kind of miracle? Yes maybe, but the world has seen healing miracles happen before. It can happen again. When Martin Luther King stood up and said "I have a dream" he spoke a kind of miracle into the world. What previously had seemed impossible became the possible and even the necessary. And one of MLK's teachers was Gandhi. The place they were coming from was a profound spirituality so deep that it resonated with people of all faiths even those that professed to have none. There were a lot of very dark moments in the 20th century, but I choose to focus on what worked. What MLK and Gandhi showed us was that handled correctly spirituality can heal the world. It is time to reclaim it as ours.

Please know that I really do know how sensitive a subject this is for most people. Many have suffered spiritual abuse. Telling an impressionable child that people they know and love are going to Hell just because those people don't follow a particular dogma is a serious form of child abuse. Seriously. Let's call it for what it is. Beyond that Religion has a long and sordid history of oppression, ignorance, and horror. That also is the simple truth.

And yet.

There is such grace, beauty and joy available in the spiritual world. I want everyone to have access to this joy. We need to reclaim this for ourselves and for the world. There are whole new worlds here to explore. And on a practical note, I actually don't see how we can get to where we want without this. Looking back at history for examples of when we saw big shifts to a higher consciousness almost all of them came from a place of profound spirituality. Buddha, Jesus, Mohammed, Confucius, Guru Nanak, etc. are all examples of spiritual leaders who suddenly shifted the consciousness of entire nations.

I'm quite OK with you being skeptical, in fact I encourage that mindset as healthy. But try to keep an open mind on this one. I started off as a profound atheist myself, and I still have some of that in me. So know that I'm talking about a spirituality that doesn't require you to believe in old myths. I won't ask you to believe anything that you can't find inside yourself, but I will challenge you to maybe go quite a bit deeper into yourself than you have gone before. We have a lot of work to do and we need all the tools at our disposal.

And it is all the same work.

Whether you are working on climate change, racism, patriarchy, or social justice in the end we are all doing the same work -- widening the circle of compassion to include all of us. Seriously, no kidding, all of us. And that includes the future generations that currently have no say in how we are treating the planet. They count too.

We need to widen our circle of compassion big enough to love everyone unconditionally. Learn to love people exactly as they are, and spend the time to truly understand them. This will require hard work, of course. Whole worlds will have to be opened up and immense struggle, effort and yes many tears will be necessary just to even get started. But in the end this is where we will have to end up.  How can it be any other way? Unless and until we discover that we are all one and we solemnly commit to love, understand, and care for each other as we would for our very own the world does not heal.

Help me here. Does this make sense? That all this work is ultimately the same? Do you need further explanation on why teaching people to care about the Black man dying under the knee of a callous police officer is the exact same work as teaching them to care for future generations? I'm honestly asking. It seems so obvious to me but maybe not to you? Both stem from too tight a circle of compassion. It is all too human to treat others as not-quite-humans. The work to get people to bring more people and (species) into their heart is the same no matter which group you are trying to get them to expand to. And the very first step along this path is to understand why people are where they are at without judgment. We need to first understand them and then go much deeper into their pain. And maybe then we can help them find a better way.

So to repeat. The steps I'm proposing are:

* Deepen our understanding (Mind)
* Step fully into the pain (Body)
* Awaken to something bigger (Heart)

Do you see how they go from one to the next? Still with me?
