---
title: "Who Am I?"
date: 2020-29-17T15:26:15Z
draft: false
weight: 30
---
Before I can go further, I think it is necessary to talk a little about myself first. Who is talking here? What is my own story?

I'm a 58 year old white male living in the Bay Area. I have already mentioned my two kids. They are from separate marriages and they are the world to me. I've been a software programmer most of my life, and I love programming. I'm book smart so I did well academically. I am a seeker of Truth. I always am looking for the truth of the matter even if that is hard. The greatest gift you can give me is to help me see a truth I have been hiding from myself.

When I was younger I was in a lot of pain. The way I found myself out of that pain was doing intensive personal growth workshops. It was the only thing that seemed to work. I tried a few Freudian psychiatrists but their approach seemed (and still does frankly) like mostly nonsense. So personal growth workshops it was. And I did a lot of them. The month of my 50th birthday I did a particularly powerful workshop and I stepped into a lot of joy. I finally committed to fully loving myself and others. It was a big step deeper into an ongoing spiritual awakening, and brought me into a new phase of my life. Suddenly it was easy to go on a very strict, life-long diet because that was the most loving thing to do for myself. And then a few years later I did guided, psychedelic Medicine work and went into even deeper joy. Now that I am mostly out of pain, my focus has shifted to service. I want to help people not just find their way out of pain, but into their own joy. It is right there waiting for all of us. Just begging to be let in. Somehow, someway I want to help that happen. After taking a number of trainings I am embarking on a side practice as Medicine guide. I am also deepening my meditation practice and after some more trainings I would like to teach [Mindful Self Compassion](https://centerformsc.org/).

And then there is my spiritual awakening. People who really know me describe me as very love based. I find that description astonishing. It is true, but it is kind of like saying I am very oxygen based. Of course I am oxygen based! I am quite attached to breathing. But so are you! And just like we sometimes forget to stop and really let ourselves breathe, we also quite often forget to stop and let ourselves really love. To me it seems obvious that everything is Love. Everything. We come from Love and return to Love. You know this to be true. Yes really. There are maybe only fleeting moments when this was really clear to you, but then as we all do you forgot. The trick is to forget less and less. I promise you there is an immense amount of joy to be found in the remembering.

So why talk about myself? At first I thought I should keep a certain distance here, because obviously this work is about so much more than me. But I am finding that if I really want this to work I can't hold anything back. I need to bring in everything that I am. Not just the shiny parts I want to show to you, but all of my rage, sorrow and pain too. Not just the gifts that I have, but the broken hurting places too. All of me is sacred and holy. All is welcome and loved. And all by myself I am nothing. If this has any chance of working I have to somehow inspire you to bring in all of yourself. All of your joy and all of your pain. All of you is sacred and holy. All of you is welcome and loved. And together as we look out at the world we need to find a way to bring everyone, yes truly everyone into it. How could it be otherwise? We need all of us.

## Explorer

When I was emerging from a very dark, hurting time in my life; a time when I wasn't even sure I wanted to continue living, I made a sacred vow to myself. To make sure I honored that vow I changed my name. I did it to make sure I would never forget. It worked. I had known for a long time before that what the name would be because I am an explorer. Odysseus is the archetype of embarking on an odyssey. My purpose is to climb tall mountains and to leap into worlds unknown to chart the course for others to follow. I'm now coming into the final phase of my purpose. I have climbed a number of mountains and leapt off of them. And truly I look at all the people who have gone so much farther than me and wonder who I am to try and talk about these mountains. But it is now time for me to do some charting. I have some things that are worth passing on. And in fact switching to this new role feels like a very scary new mountain to leap off of.

Living in Japan, married to a Japanese woman and raising our son was one of the mountains I jumped off of. I got culture shock twice in Japan. The first time was on first arriving there. Everything was so different, and I had never been to a truly foreign country before. It was a comparatively mild shock. The second, much bigger shock happened a year later just as my Japanese was starting to get good enough to give me a glimpse of how truly different the Japanese look at the world. I woke up to how I just assumed there was only one world view and that was my American way of looking at things. That is so not true! The Japanese do not view the world as a bunch of individuals making their way, they instead see the world through a much, much more group focus. The purpose of life is not just a selfish pursuit of individual happiness. I don't think either the American or Japanese perspective is wrong. From what I could tell there is a mix of profound benefits and costs to each. But what it did was to open my eyes to how differently people can view this world.

## Personal Growth

I have a personal growth mindset. What do I mean by that? I believe that living is something that we can get better at. There is a real savor to getting more skillful with all the things that come. I also know that we contain vast multitudes, and how we chose to be moment to moment is governed more than we realize by personal preference. There are areas within us that we feel more comfortable hanging out in. But it is possible for us to go to other places even if we mostly chose not to. And that is perfectly OK. But it is useful to know that is a choice.

I know from personal experience that immense, astonishing change is possible. When it happens, everything feels different and yet in some important ways nothing has changed at all. I was still me but now living in that bigger place of possibility. And just to be very clear my imperfections did not get wholly washed away in each transformation. What I call my "bullshit" is still very much here. It just weighs on me less and less, and I get increasingly skillful in navigating through it.

## Spirituality

From an early age I have always felt a call to follow Truth no matter where it leads. Because of that I fell in love with science. What I love best about science is its hard disclipine. It demands so much. You are called on to abandon even your most cherished theories and models if new, contradictory evidence comes to light.  This ability to admit you are wrong is so critical to getting to Truth.

Earlier in my life I was an atheist, because of course I was. Religion as it was presented to me seemed mostly like superstitious nonsense. And yet there were these strong hints that maybe just maybe I was missing something. I tell my waking up story [here](http://www.cosmosgame.org), but the key point is that as I paid more attention to what was true in me, I had to admit that I am deeply spiritual. We all are, but most of us tend to forget it. We have brief moments, maybe in nature, maybe at a birth or death, where we know that we are all part of something much, much bigger. But then we forget and fall asleep again. How to wake people up?

And then I found psychedlics. As I was coming back to normal space from my very first guided journey I knew I had finally found the answer. Medicine work, if properly done is a safe way to let people directly experience what I am talking about. This work is going to change the world. Why am I so confident about this? Because it already did once. The 1960's was a fascinating decade. It started out as conformist continuation of the post war 1950's but ended up radically changing the world. Think of the difference between early Beatle songs like [She Loves You](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/She_Loves_You) (1963) and [I am the Walrus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/I_Am_the_Walrus) (1967). Only four years apart and yet these songs are in completely different worlds. And it started with psychedelics, like LSD and Peyote.  Unfortunately this medicine is so powerful that it can cause damage if not treated with the proper respect. Many people hurt themselves recklessly playing with this powerful medicine and there was a strong backlash.

But sober, patient therapists have shown that if done with profound respect and care, pschedelic therapy enables life changing transformations. Many people who have struggled to heal for years and years in therapy are now finally finding their way to internal peace through guided medicine work. I believe in this approach so much that I have trained to become a Medicine Guide myself.

## Engineer

While I was participating in all those workshops and having those spiritual breakthroughs I was ashamed of being an engineer. It seemed like that kind of work is so different from what is actually useful. I thought the world needed more therapists and gifted workshop leaders, not more computer programmers. And it does. But the world needs many things right now. It turns out that engineers can offer something as well. In fact when I looked closer, there are a surprising number of things that programmers can teach the world. I talk about that in a separate [post](/save-the-world/posts/programmers-path), but what you need to know is that I bring an engineer's practical, result oriented mindset to this project.

### The Five Whys

I don't think that we can get to the world we want by continuing to do what we are doing now. Some major shifts are going to have to happen. How do you solve a difficult, challenging problem? Look deeper. This is where my engineer self comes into play. Engineers are trained to look at problems in a deeper way. One practice is to simply ask the question "why" five times, each time at a deeper level. Let me give you an example.

During the Trump presidency it felt like political commentators were blindly crashing around their bedroom at night trying to get to the bathroom. Not really recognizing in the dark what they were bumping into. Let's try going a little deeper. Why did that presidency happen? The answer to this first "why" is simply that Trump managed to get elected despite losing the popular vote. So next we ask why was he close enough in votes to make that work? Because he fired up the passions and hopes of millions of Americans who were genuinely inspired by his campaign. Next we ask why were they so inspired? Americans tend to view this as a uniquely American problem, but if you look around the world we can see an absolute plague of Authoritarian governments recently. So there is a universal appeal here. Why is this kind of politics so appealing? I will give you a clearer explanation later, but please notice that this is not just a current event. We have a very long history of this happening. It turns out that it is rare for a democracy to not escape authoritarian collapse at some point. So any explanation is going to have to account for this long history. Why is this an historical trend? Again I will talk a lot more about this later, but it turns out that many people are still living with a authoritarian mindset. The evidence for that is right before us. Until we recognize that, we can't effectively work with them. We will think they view the world just like we do. They don't.

Do you see how each "why" brings us to a deeper level? When we get deep enough we can get to the heart of the problem, and that is where we can make the real fix. If we continue to just address the surface level issues, we won't actually solve the real problem. Any plan to save the world is going to have to dig down deep enough to address the root causes. There is no magic in the number 5. Sometimes you can get deep enough with fewer than five whys sometimes you need more. My point is that we need to go much deeper than we have up to now.

### Willing to be wrong

One thing I have had to get good at as an engineer is admitting that I am wrong. That I made a mistake (sometimes a very big one) that needs to be corrected. To this day there is a sting to it, but after all these years it is very familiar to me. And especially on new projects it quite often is necessary to change your mind on major parts of the project as new information becomes available. Oddly, I think that can serve well here. I am proposing a very new, big plan. I'm pulling from well established wisdom traditions, but quite probably the way I am pulling them together is going to need a lot of review. Software engineers know a lot about how to work with a situation like this. Projects like this get better and better the more eyes you put on it. And the best way to harness that phenomenon? Open Source.
