---
title: "Unity"
date: 2022-12-16T05:26:15Z
draft: false
weight: 90
---
Again, Americans have a huge blindspot about groups. We just don’t seem to get that not everything is just about me. When I try to explain this to people I sometimes get frustrated until I remember it took me an entire year of living in Japan and married to a Japanese woman to get this — no wonder people don’t get it. It is like trying to talk to fish about the water they are swimming in. Water? What are you talking about? And yet we are all floating around in this trance of the rugged individualist.  I see it in all sorts of places. It is what makes driving so scary sometimes. When I drive in California I have to remember that most of the other drivers seem to believe they are in a driving game and consider all the other drivers to be just npc’s — not real.  To stay safe I have to just assume people will act in selfish, random ways and not get too flustered by the occasional road rage incident. Again, I’m not real to them. And they certainly don’t have any conception of being part of a greater whole — at least not while they are driving. This attitude shows up in how we do our healing work as well.

Many people are discovering the power of therapy. A lot of therapists are now actually worth visiting; they have practical, useful techniques that really help. It wasn’t always that way, but I think those bad days are mostly past. But therapy is a very individualistic path. It is incredibly necessary and useful for healing work around, say, deep trauma work, but it doesn’t have much to say about the wisdom traditions that we also need. People do great healing work with a therapist, and get to a point where they want to continue their journey even deeper. And both they and the therapist then don’t really know what to do. This is where group work comes in. It is how people get to that next level.

And we crave the group experience. We were born for it.  There is a beautiful group connection magic that comes when we go through something intense together. People connect and become one. We are a deeply social animal and we are meant to form groups both large and small. We even have mirror neurons dedicated to this task. If someone is grieving I grieve too. If someone is in pain I hurt also. When someone does some work for themselves they are doing work for me as well. This is one reason why HAI creates so much space for sharing, because we can learn so much from each other. The other reason is that when we are in a safe, deeply connected group like this, people become our sacred witness. When I state that I am committed to loving the hurt little boy inside myself to the group, that becomes a sacred vow. There is something incredibly healing to be witnessed in this way.

What works best is for a group to create a truly safe space for doing vulnerable shares. Safe enough to show up as who we truly are. Not just the facade that we want people to see, but all of us. And when we see someone sharing vulnerably the full extent of their pain, we quite often have a moment of “Oh! That is me! I have that too!”.  They are doing the work for everyone in the room — everyone watching starts to take on that work as well. And one person’s courage gives rise to another person’s. It is a beautiful, upward spiral towards healing. People come up to the front of the room to share all sorts of diverse ways of being human. And we start to recognize all parts of ourself.  We start to recognize that people are just a different kind of mirror we can look into.

Does that make sense? That other people are a mirror for us? Some people get this right away, but others struggle with it. There is a healthy way to do this and an unhealthy way. The unhealthy way is called “projection”, and the idea is that almost everything we see in others is our own projection onto that person. When we project we don’t even really see the other person just our own illusions. But there is also a deeper, healthier way to hold this. When we do this mirror work we recognize that there is no place of being human that we ourselves can’t get to. No matter how strange a place a person lands in, we all have the potential to go there too. This is easy to believe when you see someone who shares many things with you, like a friend. So you can see how they might be a mirror for you. It is harder to believe when you look at someone so different from you that you don’t even understand them. When I look at people like that I recognize that they have journeyed to a very different place than I have.  I wonder what I might be like if I went to that same place. I know that it is possible. They are a mirror into that part of myself I have not yet discovered. 

The next step in this mirror work is to realize that everything we resist in others is that which we resist in ourself. It is also true for emotional attraction. That which we love in others is that which we love in ourself. For example, for a long time I had a resistance to people who had deep, pitted acne scars. The first step was just to simply acknowledge that I had this resistance. Then it didn’t take too much investigation to realize that yep I truly hate my acne scars and here I was almost literally looking in the mirror and not liking what I saw. Sometimes it takes a little more investigation. For example, I sometimes have a resistance to people who are morbidly obese.  It is tempting to simply dismiss this as simply not finding that attractive, but the truth is that I have off and on struggled with my weight my whole life. You wouldn’t know it to look at me but it is true. I have this secret fear of simply letting go and ballooning up to an enormous size. That seems like a real possibility. So when I see someone who is quite overweight my resistance comes from me projecting that fear (and judgment) onto that other person. I’m not even really looking at that person!  All I can see is that thing I don’t like in myself. It is fine if you doubt this, all I ask is to really get mindful. Notice when you have a strong resistance (or emotional attraction) to someone and then just get curious about why that might be. Hold open the possibility that what you are resisting (or attracted to) is some quite possibly deeply buried part of yourself that you don’t like.

And just like we need to work on looking into a mirror and loving who we see no matter what, we also need to learn to look at others and love what we see, no matter what. That brings us back to the Love principle. Let’s go there next.

